Krishnagopal Sarkar of the village of Jhinkrakota handed over the
running of his estate and his other responsibilities to his elder son, and
set off for Benares. His humble tenants wept bitterly at losing him: so
liberal and pious a landlord was rare indeed in the age of Kali.

His son Bipinbihari was a modern, sophisticated BA. He had a beard,
wore glasses, and did not mix much with others. He was highly virtuous:
he never even smoked or played cards. His manner was courteous and
affable – but in fact he was a very hard man, and his tenants quickly felt
the effect of this. The old landlord had been lenient with them; but with
his son there was no hope of a paisa’s exemption from debt or rent, on
whatever grounds. They had to pay on the nail, without a single day’s
leeway.

When Bipinbihari took over, he found that his father had frequently
released land to Brahmins free of rent, and many people had had their
rent reduced. If anyone came with a plea of some kind, he was never
able to refuse it: this was his weakness.

‘It won’t do,’ said Bipinbihari. ‘I can’t let half the estate go rent-free.’
He reached two separate conclusions. Firstly, workshy people who sat at
home growing fat on rent from land they had sublet were in most cases
useless and deserved no pity. Charity to the likes of them simply gave
refuge to idlers. Secondly, it was much harder to ensure an income than
in his father and grandfather’s time. There was much more scarcity. It
cost four times as much to preserve a gentleman’s dignity as it had in the
past. His father’s open-handed, happy-go-lucky scattering of assets would
not do now; on the contrary, they should now be retrieved and
expanded. Bipinbihari began to do what his conscience told him – that
is, he began to act according to ‘principle’.1 Whatever had gone out of
the house, bit by bit came in again. He allowed very few of the rent-free
tenancies to continue, ensuring that even these would not be permanent.

In Benares, Krishnagopal heard, through letters, of his tenants’
distress: some of them actually went and appealed to him personally. He
wrote to Bipinbihari saying that what he was doing was deplorable.
Bipinbihari replied that formerly when gifts had been made various
things were received in return. There had been a reciprocal relationship
between zamindar and tenants. Recently laws had been passed that
banned anything being given in return other than straightforward rent: a
zamindar’s rights and privileges, other than rent, had been abolished. So
what else could he do but keep a close eye on his dues? If the tenants
gave him nothing extra, why should he give extra to them? The
landlord-tenant relationship was now purely commercial. He would go
bankrupt if he went on being so charitable: it would be impossible to
maintain either his property or his ancestral dignity.

Krishnagopal pondered deeply on the way that the times had so
greatly changed, and concluded that the rules of his own era no longer
applied to what the younger generation had to do. If one tried to
interfere from a distance, they would say, ‘Take back your property then;
we can’t manage it in any other manner.’ What was the point? It was
better to devote what was left of one’s life to God.

II
Things went on like this. After a great deal of litigation, wrangling and
argument, Bipinbihari had arranged nearly everything as he wanted.
Most tenants were afraid to resist his pressure; Mirja Bibi’s son
Achimaddi Bisvas was the only one who refused to give in.

Bipinbihari’s attacks on him were the most severe of all. Land given
away to a Brahmin could be justified by tradition, but it was impossible
to see why this son of a Muslim widow should be given land free or
nearly free. True, he had won a scholarship and learnt a little at school,
but this did not give him the right to be so above himself. Bipin learnt
from the older staff on the estate that the family had received favours
from the landlord for a long time – they did not know exactly why.
Maybe the widow had gone to him with tales of woe, and he had taken
pity on her. But to Bipin the favours seemed highly inappropriate. Never
having seen the family’s former poverty, he looked at their prosperity
and arrogance and felt they had cheated his soft-hearted, unsuspecting
father – had stolen some of the zamindar’s wealth.

Achimaddi was a very confident young man. He was determined not
to budge an inch from his rights, and a fierce contest developed. His
widowed mother urged repeatedly that it was stupid to take on the
zamindar: they had been protected so far - it was best to have faith in
that protection, and give the landlord what he wanted. ‘You don’t
understand these things, Mother,’ said Achimaddi.

Achimaddi lost at each stage as the case went through the courts. But
the more he lost, the more his tenacity increased. He staked all he had
on keeping all that he had.

One afternoon Mirja Bibi came with a small present of garden
vegetables and met Bipinbihari privately. Casting her plaintive eyes on
him as if caressing him with her motherly gaze, she said, ‘You are like
my son – may Allah preserve you. Do not ruin Achim, my dear – there’ll
be no virtue in that. I consign him to you: think of him as an unruly
younger brother. Son, do not begrudge him a tiny piece of your untold
wealth!’

Bipin was furious with the woman for impertinently using the
privilege of age to speak so familiarly to him. ‘You’re a woman,’ he said,
‘you don’t understand these things. If you’ve anything to tell me, send
your son.’ Mirja Bibi had now been told by another’s son as well as her
own that she didn’t understand these things. Praying to Allah, dabbing at
her eyes, the widow returned to her house.

III
The case went from the criminal court to the civil court, from the civil
court to the district court, from the district court to the High Court. It
continued for nearly eighteen months. By the time that Achimaddi was
awarded a partial victory in the appeal court, he was up to his neck in
debt. Moreover, he had escaped from the tiger on the river-bank only to
be assailed by the crocodile in the river. The money-lenders chose this
moment to put the court’s decree into action. A day was fixed for the
auctioning of all that Achimaddi had.

The day was Monday, market-day on the bank of a small river near
by. The river was high during the monsoon, so some of the trading was
on the bank, some of it in boats: the hubbub was continuous. Among the
produce of the season, jackfruit was especially plentiful, and there was
lots of hilsa-fish too. The sky was cloudy: many of the traders, fearing
rain, stuck bamboo-poles into the ground and stretched canopies over
their stalls.

Achimaddi had also come to do some shopping, but without a paisa in
his hand: no one would sell to him even on credit. He had brought a
kitchen-chopper and a brass plate, hoping to raise money by pawning
them.

Bipinbihari had strolled out to take the evening air, attended by a
couple of bodyguards with lāthis. Attracted by the crowd, he decided to
visit the market. He was just – out of interest – questioning Dvari the 
oilman about his earnings, when Achimaddi came at him charging and
roaring like a tiger, brandishing his chopper. The stallholders intervened
and quickly disarmed him. He was soon handed over to the police, and
the trading in the market continued as before.

It cannot be said that Bipinbihari was unhappy at this turn of events.
For a hunted animal to turn and have a go at the hunter is an atrocious
breach of etiquette; but never mind, the fellow would receive his due
punishment. The women of Bipin’s household were outraged by the
episode. The fellow was an impudent scoundrel! The prospect of his
punishment, though, consoled them.

Meanwhile, that same evening, Mirja Bibi’s house – foodless, childless
– grew darker than death. Everyone forgot what had happened, had
their dinner and went to bed: only for one old woman was it more
significant than anything else, yet there was no one in the whole world
to fight against it except for her: a few old bones and a frightened, bitter
heart in an unlit hut!

IV
Three days passed. On the next there was to be a hearing before the

Deputy Magistrate. Bipin himself was to give evidence. He had no
objection, even though the zamindar had never appeared in the witnessbox 
before. That morning at the appointed time, he put on a turban and
watch-chain and with great ostentation was carried in a palanquin to the
court. The court-room was packed: there had not been such a sensational
case for a long time.

Just before the case was to be heard, an attendant came up to
Bipinbihari and said something in his ear: somewhat flustered, saying he
was needed outside, he left the court-room. Outside, he saw his aged
father standing a little way off under a banyan tree. He was barefoot,
wore a nāmābali, and carried a Krishna-rosary: his slender body seemed
to glow with kindness; calm compassion for the world shone from his
brow. In his chapkan, jobbā and tight fitting pantaloons, Bipin had
difficulty in doing obeisance to his father. His turban slipped over his
nose, and his watch fell out of his pocket. Fumbling to replace them, he
invited his father to step into a lawyer’s house near by. ‘No,’ said
Krishnagopal, ‘what I need to say can be said here.’

Bipin’s attendants drove curious bystanders away. ‘Everything must be
done to release Achim,’ said Krishnagopal, ‘and the property taken from
him should be returned.’

‘Have you come all the way from Benares just to say this?’ asked
Bipin, amazed. ‘Why do you favour him so much?’

‘What would be the point of telling you why?’ said Krishnagopal.

Bipin was insistent. ‘I’ve managed to retrieve gifts of land from many
whom I felt were unworthy of them, Brahmins among them – and you
didn’t turn a hair. So why have you gone to such lengths over this
Muslim fellow? If, having gone so far, I release Achim and hand back
everything, what shall I say to people?’

Krishnagopal was silent for a while. Then, fiddling nervously with his
rosary, he said in a quavering voice, ‘If a frank explanation is necessary,
tell them that Achimaddi is your brother – my son.’

‘By a Muslim mother?’ said Bipin in horror.

‘Yes, my boy,’ said Krishnagopal.

Bipin was flabbergasted. At length he said, ‘You can tell me
everything later. Please come home now.’

‘No,’ said Krishnagopal, ‘I shall not live at home ever again. I’m
returning to Benares at once. Please do whatever your conscience
permits.’ Blessing him, fighting back tears, unsteady on his feet,
Krishnagopal set off back.

Bipin could not think of what to say or do. He stood in silence. But at
least he understood now what morals were like in the old days! How
superior he was to his father in education and character! This was what
happened when people had no ‘principles’! As he walked back to the
court, he saw Achim waiting outside – drained, exhausted, pale, 
whitelipped, red-eyed – captive between two guards, clad in dirty rags. And
this was Bipin’s brother!

Bipin was friendly with the Deputy Magistrate. The case was
dismissed on a technicality, and within a few days Achim was restored
to his former circumstances. But he did not understand the reason, and
other people were surprised too.

It soon got about, however, that Krishnagopal had appeared at the
time of the trial. All sorts of rumours circulated. Shrewd lawyers guessed
the truth of the matter. Among them, the lawyer Ramtaran had been
brought up and educated at Krishnagopal’s expense. He had all along
suspected – and now he could see clearly – that if you looked carefully,
even the most respectable could be caught out. However much a man
might finger his rosary, he was probably as much of a rogue as anyone
else. The difference between the respectable and the unrespectable was
that the former were hypocrites and the latter were not. In deciding,
however, that Krishnagopal’s famous generosity and piety were a sly
façade, Ramtaran found that an old and difficult problem had been
solved and, in addition, felt – through what logic I do not know – that
the burden of gratitude was lifted from his shoulders. What a relief!

