I went to school with Surabala, and we played ‘getting married’ games
together. Surabala’s mother was very affectionate towards me whenever
I went to their house. Seeing us as a pair, she would murmur to herself,
‘They’re meant for each other!’ I was young, but I understood her drift
fairly well. The feeling that I had a greater than normal claim to
Surabala fixed itself in my mind. I became so puffed up with this feeling
that I tended to boss her about. She meekly obeyed all my orders and
endured my punishments. She was praised in the neighbourhood for her
beauty, but beauty meant nothing to my barbarous young eyes: I merely
knew that Surabala had been born to acknowledge my lordship over her
– hence my inconsiderate behaviour.

My father was the chief rent-collector on the Chaudhuris’ estate. His
hope was that he would train me in estate-management when I was
grown up, and find me a job as a land-agent somewhere. But I didn’t like
that idea at all. My ambitions were as high as our neighbour’s son
Nilratan’s, who ran away to Calcutta to study and had become chief
clerk to a Collector. Even if I didn’t become that, I was determined to be
at least Head Clerk in a magistrate’s court. I had always noticed how
respectful my father was towards legal officers of that kind. I had known
since childhood that it was necessary, on various occasions, to make
offerings to them of fish, vegetables and money; so I gave a specially
privileged position in my heart to court employees, even to the peons.
They were the most venerated of Bengal’s deities, new miniature
editions of her millions of gods. In pursuing prosperity, people placed
greater trust in them than in bountiful Ganesh himself – so all the tribute
that Ganesh formerly received now went to them.

Inspired by Nilratan’s example, I also took my chance to run away to
Calcutta. First I stayed with an acquaintance from my home village; later
my father began to give me some help towards my education. My studies
proceeded along conventional lines.

In addition, I attended meetings and assemblies. I had no doubt that it
would soon become necessary for me to lay down my life for my
country. But I had no idea how to accomplish so momentous an act, and
no one to look to for an example. I was not, however, short of
enthusiasm. We were village-boys, and had not learnt to ridicule
everything like the smart boys of Calcutta; so our zeal was unshakeable.
The leaders at our meetings gave speeches, but we used to wander about
from house to house in the heat of the day, without lunch, begging for
subscriptions; or we stood by the roadside giving out handbills; or we
arranged benches and chairs before meetings. We were ready to roll up
our sleeves and fight at the slightest word against our leaders. But to the
smart boys of Calcutta, all this merely demonstrated our rural naïvety.

I had come to qualify myself to be a Head Clerk or Superintendent;
but I was actually preparing to become Mazzini or Garibaldi. Meanwhile
my father and Surabala’s father agreed that I should be married to her. I
had run away to Calcutta at the age of fifteen, when Surabala was eight;
now I was eighteen. In my father’s opinion my marriageable age was
elapsing. But I vowed I would never marry: I would die for my country
instead. I told my father I would not marry until my studies were
completely finished.

Two or three months later I heard that Surabala had been married to
the lawyer Ramlochan Babu. I was busy collecting subscriptions for
down-trodden India, so I attached no importance to the news.

I passed into college, and was about to take my second-year exams
when news came of my father’s death. I was not the only one in the
family – I had my mother and two sisters. So I had to leave college and
search for work. With great difficulty I managed to get a post as assistant
master in a secondary school in a small town in Naukhali District. I told
myself I had found the right sort of work. My guidance and
encouragement would raise each pupil to be a leader of the new India.
I started work. I found that the coming exam was much more
demanding than the new India. The headmaster objected if I breathed a
single word to the pupils outside Grammar and Algebra. In a couple of
months my enthusiasm had faded away. I became one of those dull
individuals who sits and broods when he is at home; who, when
working, shoulders his plough with his head bowed, whipped from
behind, meekly breaking up earth; content at night to stuff his belly with
attle-fodder; no energy or enterprise in him at all.

For fear of fire, one of the teachers had to live on the school premises.
I was unmarried, so this duty fell upon me. I lived in a hut adjoining the
large, thatched school-building. The school was rather isolated; it stood
next to a big pond. There were betel-nut, coconut and coral trees all
around; a pair of huge old nim trees – adjacent to each other and to the
schoolhouse itself – gave shade.

There is something which I haven’t mentioned so far and which for a
long time I didn’t think worthy of mention. The government lawyer
here, Ramlochan Ray, lived quite near our schoolhouse, and I knew that
his wife – my childhood companion Surabala – was there with him.

I became acquainted with Ramlochan Babu. I’m not sure if he was
aware that as a child I had known Surabala, and when we met I did not
think it appropriate to mention this. I did not particularly think about
the fact that Surabala had at one time been involved with my life.

One day, during a school holiday, I went along to Ramlochan’s house
for a chat. I can’t remember what we talked about – probably India’s
present plight. Not that he was very well-informed or concerned about
the subject, but it was a way of passing an hour-and-a-half or so,
smoking, and indulging in pleasurable gloom. As we talked I heard in
the next room the soft tinkling of bangles, the rustle of garments, the
sound of footsteps; it wasn’t hard to deduce that inquisitive eyes were
observing me through the half-open window. Suddenly I remembered
those eyes – large eyes full of trust, simplicity and childish devotion:
black pupils, dark eyelashes, an ever-calm gaze. Something seemed to
clench my heart, and an anguish throbbed within me.

I returned to my hut, but the pain remained. Writing and reading
were no distraction from it; it oppressed me like a huge weight in my
chest, thudding in my veins. In the evening I calmed down a little and
asked myself why I should be in such a state. The inner answer came,
‘You are wondering why you lost your Surabala.’

I replied, ‘But I gave her up willingly. I couldn’t let her wait for me for
ever.’

Someone within me said, ‘You could have got her if you had wanted
then, but now nothing whatever you can do will give you the right even
to see her. However close the Surabala of your childhood lives to you
now, however often you hear the tinkle of her bangles or feel the scent
of her hair brushing past you, there will always be a wall keeping you
apart.’

‘No matter,’ I said, ‘who is Surabala to me?’

The reply came: ‘Surabala is not yours today, but think what she could
have been to you!’

That was true. Surabala could have been mine. She could have been
my closest, most intimate companion; she could have shared all my
sorrows and joys; but now she was so far away, so much someone else’s,
seeing her now was forbidden, it was a fault to speak to her, a sin to
think about her. And a certain Ramlochan Babu, who was nobody
before, was suddenly in the way. By mouthing a few mantras, he had
whisked Surabala away from everyone else in the world.

I am not about to propose a new social morality; I do not wish to
break convention or tear away restrictions. I am merely expressing my
real feelings. Are all the feelings that arise in one’s mind reasonable? I
could not drive from my mind the conviction that the Surabala who
reigned behind Ramlochan’s portals was more mine than his. I admit this
feeling was highly illogical and improper, but it was not unnatural.

I was now unable to concentrate on my work. At midday, as pupils
burbled over their books, and everything outside shimmered, and a soft
warm breeze brought the scent of the flowers of the nim trees, I yearned
– what I yearned for I don’t know – but this much I can say: I did not
want to spend the rest of my life correcting the grammar of India’s
future hopefuls. I hated sitting alone in my large room after school
hours, yet I couldn’t bear anyone coming to see me. At dusk I listened to
the meaningless rustle of the betel-nut and coconut trees by the pond,
and reflected on life. What a baffling tangle! No one thinks of doing the
right thing at the right time; instead, wrong and unsettling desires come
at the wrong time. You, worthless though you are, could have been
Surabala’s husband and lived out your days in contentment. You wanted
to be Garibaldi, but look what you became – an assistant master in a
village school! And the lawyer Ramlochan Ray, why did he need to be
Surabala’s husband? She was nothing to him, right up to the wedding:
he married her without giving her a thought, became a government
lawyer and was earning nicely, thank you! He ticked her off if the milk
smelled of smoke, and when he was in a good mood he ordered some
jewellery for her. He was plump, wore a long coat, was perfectly pleased
with life, never spent his evenings sitting by the pond staring at the stars
and regretting the past.

Ramlochan had to go away for a few days on a big court-case. Surabala
must have been as lonely in her house as I was in mine.
It was Monday, I remember. The sky had been cloudy since dawn. At
ten, rain began to patter down gently. Seeing the look of the sky, the
headmaster closed the school early. Large chunks of black cloud rolled
across the sky all day, as if grandly preparing for something. The next
day torrential rain started in the afternoon, and a storm blew up. It
rained harder and harder through the night and the wind blew more and
more fiercely. At first it had blown from the east, but it gradually swung
round to the north and north-east.

It was pointless trying to sleep that night. I remembered that Surabala
was alone in her house. The schoolhouse was much sturdier than hers. I
several times thought of fetching her over to the school – I could spend
the night on the raised bank of the pond. But I could not bring myself to
do this.

At about one or one-thirty in the morning the roar of flood-waters
became audible – a tidal wave was approaching from the sea. I left my
room and went outside. I made my way to Surabala’s house. The bank of
the pond was on my way – I managed to wade as far as that, up to my
knees in water. I scrambled up on to the bank, but a second wave dashed
against it. Part of the bank was about six or seven feet high. As I climbed
up on to it, someone else was climbing from the other side. I knew with
every fibre of my being who that person was; and I had no doubt that
she knew who I was.

We stood alone on an island nine feet long, everything around us
submerged in water. It was like the end of the world – no stars in the
sky, all earthly lamps extinguished. There would have been no harm in
saying something, but no word was spoken. I didn’t even ask if she was
all right, nor did she ask me. We just stood, staring into the darkness. At
our feet, deep, black, deadly waters roared and surged.

Surabala had abandoned the world to be with me now. She had no
one but me. The Surabala of my childhood had floated into my life from
some previous existence, from some ancient mysterious darkness; she
had entered the sunlight and moonlight of this crowded world to join me
at my side. Now, years later, she had left the light and the crowds to be
with me alone in this terrifying, deserted, apocalyptic darkness. As a
young budding flower, she had been thrown near me on to the stream of
life; now, as a full-bloomed flower, she had again been thrown near me,
on the stream of death. If but one more wave had come, we would have
been shed from our slender, separate stems of existence and become one.
But better that the wave did not come. Better that Surabala should live
in happiness with her husband, home and children. Enough that I stood
for a single night on the shore of the apocalypse, and tasted eternal joy.

The night was nearly over. The wind died down; the waters receded.
Surabala, without saying a word, returned home, and I also went silently
to my room. I reflected: I did not become a Collector’s chief clerk; I did
not become Court Clerk; I did not become Garibaldi; I became an
assistant master in a run-down school. In my entire life, only once – for a
brief single night – did I touch Eternity. Only on that one night, out of
all my days and nights, was my trivial existence fulfilled.
