‘If you want my opinion,’ said Shashi’s neighbour Tara after describing
in detail how one of the husbands in the village ill-treated his wife,
‘husbands like that should have burning coals shoved down their
throats.’

Shashi, wife of Jaygopal, was appalled by such a remark. It did not do
credit to a wife to wish anything other than the fire of a cheroot to be in
a husband’s mouth, whatever the circumstances. But when she expressed
her dismay, the hard-hearted Tara said with doubled venom, ‘Better to
be widowed in seven successive lives than have a husband like that.’ And
ending the conversation there, she went on her way.

‘I can’t imagine any fault in a husband so bad that one could feel such
dreadful things about him,’ said Shashi to herself. As she reflected on
this, her soft heart swelled with tender feelings towards her own absent
husband. She stretched her arms over the part of the bed where he
normally slept, kissed the vacant pillow, sensed a whiff of her husband’s
hair, and then, closing the door, took from a wooden box an almost
forgotten photograph of him and some of his letters. She sat alone in her
room through the still afternoon, musing and reflecting, tearfully pining
for him.

Shashikala and Jaygopal were not recently married. They had been
married as children, and now they had children of their own. They had
been together for a long time, and lived normally and straightforwardly.
There had never been signs of exceptional passion between them. But
when, after nearly sixteen years in which they had never been separated,
her husband’s work had suddenly taken him away, Shashi felt a much
more intense love for him. His absence pulled at her heart, tightening
the knot of love; feelings whose existence she had never previously
known tugged and twinged within her. So despite her years, and despite
being a wife and mother, Shashi sat on her lonely bed, daydreaming like
a fresh young bride. The love that had, unbeknown to her, flowed
through her life like a river, suddenly woke her with its murmur: she
began to see a succession of golden cities and flowering arbours along its
banks, whose promise of pleasure was now beyond her reach, a thing of
the past. She said to herself, ‘When I get my husband back I shall never
again let life be dull, or the spring fruitless.’ Why had she argued so
often with her husband over footling matters? Now, in her intensity of
love, she resolved never to be impatient again, never to oppose his
wishes or commands. She would meekly and lovingly accept his
activities whether good or bad, because nothing was more precious or
divine than a husband.

For many years Shashikala had been her parents’ beloved only child.
So although Jaygopal earned little, he was not anxious about the future.
He would inherit from his father-in-law Kaliprasanna enough to live like
a prince, in village terms. But very unexpectedly, at an advanced age,
Shashikala’s parents produced a son. Truth to tell, Shashi was rather
scandalized that her parents should have done something so
inappropriate to their years; and Jaygopal was not too happy either.

Her parents’ love for this child of their old age became extreme.
Unknowingly, this new-born, suckling, sleepy brother-in-law robbed
Jaygopal of his hopes, seized them in his tiny fists. Hence this job in an
Assam tea-garden. Everyone had urged him to look for work nearer
home, but whether out of grudge or from the notion that he would
quickly rise high there, Jaygopal listened to no one. Leaving Shashi and
their children in her father’s house, he went off to Assam. It was the first
time he had ever been away from her.

Shashikala was very angry with her baby brother for causing this. A
grievance that cannot be expressed openly always festers. He just sucked
at the breast comfortably and shut his eyes in sleep, but his big sister
resented having to warm his milk or cool his rice, making her own son
late for school. Her resentment upset the whole household.

Within a short time the boy’s mother was dead. Before she died she
entrusted her baby son to her daughter’s care.

It was not long before the motherless infant conquered his sister’s
heart. He would leap with a shriek on to her lap and greedily gobble her
face and eyes and nose with his toothless little mouth; he would grab her
hair in his fist and refuse to let go; he would wake before dawn, snuggle
close, tickle her gently and babble; whatever he did she was helpless!
Soon he was calling her ‘Jiji’ and ‘Jijimā’,1 getting up to mischief when
she worked or rested, eating what was forbidden, going where he was
forbidden – she gave in totally to this wilful little scallywag. Because he
had no mother, his hold on her was all the greater.

II
The boy’s name was Nilmani. When he was two years old, his father fell
seriously ill. A letter was sent to Jaygopal, telling him to come at once.
With great difficulty Jaygopal managed to get leave: when he arrived,
Kaliprasanna was dying.

Before he died, he entrusted his little son to the guardianship of
Jaygopal and left a quarter of his estate to his daughter. Jaygopal
therefore had to resign from his job and return to manage the estate.

Husband and wife were reunited after a long time. If a material thing
gets broken it can be dovetailed together again; but there are no clean
edges along which two people who have been apart for a long time can
be stuck together. This is because the mind is a living substance,
changing and ripening with every moment. For Shashi, to be reunited
was a new emotional experience. It was as if she were marrying her
husband again. The staleness that the habits of a long-standing marriage
bring about had been dispelled by absence; she felt she was receiving her
husband back more fully than before. She promised herself: ‘Whatever
the future may bring, however long I live, I shall never let this bright
new love for my husband grow dim.’

But Jaygopal’s feelings at the reunion were different. When they had
lived together before, all his interests and habits had been bound up
with Shashi: she had grown to be a permanent feature in his life – if ever
he was without her, gaps were made in his daily routine. So when he
first went away, Jaygopal found himself at a loss. But gradually the gaps
were patched over with new routines. Not only that. Formerly, his life
had been leisurely and serene; but now, over the last two years, he had
become so ambitious to improve his circumstances that he thought of
little else. Compared to this, his old way of life seemed thin as a shadow.
In women, the greatest changes are worked by love; in men, by
ambition.

Jaygopal did not get his wife back after two years exactly as she had
been before. His little brother-in-law had added a new dimension to her
life – one which was completely unknown to him, one in which he had
no part. His wife tried to get him to share her love for the boy, but I
cannot say she was successful. She would bring Nilmani in her arms and
smilingly hold him up to her husband: Nilmani would cling to her, bury
his face in her shoulder, would not acknowledge any kinship with him.
She wanted her little brother to show Jaygopal his tricks – but Jaygopal
was not very interested, and the boy was not keen either. Jaygopal could
not for the life of him understand why this skinny, large-headed, solemn,
dark-complexioned child deserved such affection.

Women are never slow to perceive real feelings. Shashi soon saw that
Jaygopal was not enamoured of Nilmani. She then became very
protective: doing her utmost to keep him away from her husband’s
withering stare. The child became her secret treasure, the object of her
love alone. Everyone knows that the more love is secretive, the more it
grows.

When Nilmani cried, Jaygopal was extremely irritated, so Shashi
would clasp him to her breast trying with all the force of her embrace to
soothe him. And when her husband’s sleep was disturbed by Nilmani’s
crying, and he shouted out in fury, full of aggression towards him,
Shashi herself felt guilty and embarrassed. She swept him out of earshot,
and soothed him to sleep again with meek and adoring repetitions of
‘My treasure, my jewel, my precious’.

Quarrels between children can flare up for various reasons. Formerly
on such occasions Shashi would punish her own children, taking her
brother’s part because he had no mother. But now a change of judge had
brought about a change in the penal code. Nilmani had to suffer harsh
punishments, unfair and undeserved. The injustice of it cut his sister to
the quick: she would take her disgraced little brother to her room, give
him sweets and toys, caress him and kiss him, do everything she could to
heal the child’s wounded feelings.

The result was this: the more Shashi doted on Nilmani the more
Jaygopal resented him, and the more dislike Jaygopal showed towards
Nilmani the more Shashi adored him. Jaygopal never actually ill-treated
his wife, and Shashi continued to serve him with silent, meek devotion;
it was only Nilmani who was a concealed but ever-growing bone of
contention between them. Silent animosity and jealousy of this kind is
harder to bear than open conflict.

III
Nilmani’s head was out of proportion to his body. It was as if the Creator
had blown a bubble on the end of a stick. Doctors were afraid sometimes
that the boy would be as fragile and short-lived as a bubble. It took him
a long time to learn to talk and walk. His mournful, solemn face made
one think that his parents had piled their elderly worries on to this little
child’s head. But his big sister’s careful nurturing got him through the
dangerous years, and he reached the age of six.

In the month of Kārtik, Shashi dressed Nilmani up as a little
gentleman in a red-bordered dhoti and performed the bhāiphõtā
ceremony, marking his forehead with sandal-paste. Tara – the bluntspeaking 
neighbour mentioned earlier – appeared then, and picked a
quarrel with Shashi. ‘What good will the paste do,’ she said, ‘when in
fact you’ve been secretly ruining him?’

Shashi was thunderstruck. The rumour was – so Tara told her – that
she and her husband had defaulted on the payment of duty on Nilmani’s
estate, so that they could buy it back at auction in the name of
Jaygopal’s cousin. Shashi cursed those who put about such slanders: they
deserved to catch leprosy.

She then went tearfully to her husband and told him what people
were saying. ‘You can’t trust anyone these days,’ said Jaygopal. ‘Upen is
my cousin: I was entirely happy to leave the management of Nilmani’s
property to him. I had no idea he had secretly defaulted on payment of
duty, and bought the estate at Hasilpur himself.’

‘Aren’t you going to sue him?’ said Shashi in amazement.

‘How can I sue my cousin?’ said Jaygopal. ‘And there’d be no point –
it would just be a waste of money.’

To trust her husband’s word was Shashi’s highest duty, but she had no
faith in him now. Her happy family, her loving home, now seemed
monstrously ugly. What had been a haven was suddenly a cruel trap,
squeezing both her and her brother on all sides. How could she, a
woman, on her own, protect the hapless Nilmani? What refuge was
there? The more she thought, the more her heart filled with horror, and
the more it filled with love for her little brother in his plight. She
wondered if there was a way in which she could appeal to the GovernorGeneral: 
maybe she could even write to the Queen of England to restore
her brother’s inheritance. The Queen would never have allowed the
Hasilpur estate – which brought in 758 rupees a year for Nilmani – to be
sold. She went on thinking about how she would appeal to the Queen to
secure full restitution from her husband’s cousin; but suddenly now
Nilmani developed a fever, and started to have convulsions.

Jaygopal called the local Indian doctor. When Shashi begged him to
call a better doctor he said, ‘Why, is Matilal such a bad one?’

Shashi fell at his feet, implored him. ‘All right,’ said Jaygopal, ‘I’ll
bring the doctor from town.’

Shashi clasped Nilmani to her, lay down clutching him to her breast.
Nilmani too never took his eyes off her; held on to her lest she should
slip away while he was not looking. Even when he fell asleep, he
continued to grasp her sari.

In the evening, after a whole day of this, Jaygopal returned and said,
‘I couldn’t get the town doctor – he’s gone to see a patient out of town
somewhere. I’ve got to leave today to attend a court-case. I’ve told
Matilal to visit the patient regularly.’

That night Nilmani began to rave in his sleep. In the morning Shashi,
without pausing to consider the matter, boarded a boat with her sick
brother and travelled all the way to the doctor’s house. The doctor was
at home – he had not left to go anywhere. Seeing that Shashi was of
good family, he arranged accommodation for her, with an elderly widow
in attendance, and started to treat the boy.

The next day Jaygopal arrived. Blazing with anger, he ordered his
wife to return with him at once. ‘Wild horses couldn’t drag me back,’ she
said. ‘You and your people want to kill Nilmani: he has no mother, no
father, no one but me. I’ll protect him.’

‘Then stay here,’ roared Jaygopal, ‘and never set foot in my house
again.’

‘Your house!’ said Shashi, incensed too. ‘It’s my brother’s house!’

‘We’ll see about that,’ said Jaygopal.

For a few days, local people raised an uproar about these events. The
neighbour Tara said, ‘If a woman wants to quarrel with her husband, she
should do it comfortably at home. There’s no need to move out. After all,
a husband is a husband!’

By spending all the money she had with her, and by selling her
ornaments, Shashi managed to save her brother from death. She then
heard that the large piece of land her family owned at Dvari village, on
which their house stood, and which, all told, brought in an annual
income of nearly 1,500 rupees, had been appropriated by Jaygopal in his
own name and in collusion with the zamindar. The property now
belonged to him, not to her brother.

When he had got over his illness and was up again, Nilmani said
piteously, ‘Didi, let’s go home.’ He missed his playmates – Shashi’s own
children. ‘Please, Didi, let’s go home,’ he said, over and over again. His
sister could only weep and say, ‘Where is our home now?’ But there was
no point in weeping. Nilmani had no one in the world now but his big
sister. When this had sunk in, Shashi dried her eyes and went to see the
wife of Tarini Babu, the Deputy Magistrate.

The Deputy Magistrate knew Jaygopal. He was annoyed that a wife of
good family should want to leave her home and quarrel with her
husband over property. Soothing her down, he wrote urgently to
Jaygopal – who came at once, forced his wife and brother-in-law on to a
boat and took them home.

For the second time, husband and wife were reunited after a
separation. Fated to be united!

Nilmani was delighted to be back playing with his friends. It broke
Shashi’s heart to see his carefree happiness.

IV

In the winter the English District Magistrate went out on tour and
pitched his tent in the village, hoping to do some hunting there. Nilmani
met the Magistrate on a village-path. The other boys made scarce, giving
him as wide a berth as Chanakya recommends for animals with sharp
nails, teeth or horns. But the solemn Nilmani stayed to examine the
sāheb with calm curiosity.

‘Do you go to school?’ asked the Magistrate pleasantly.

The boy silently nodded, ‘Yes.’

‘What texts are you reading?’ asked the sāheb.

Not understanding the meaning of the word ‘text’, Nilmani went on
staring at the Magistrate. Later, he enthusiastically described this
meeting with the Magistrate to his sister.

That afternoon Jaygopal dressed himself up in chapkan, pantaloons
and turban, and went to pay his respects to the honourable Magistrate.
Petitioners, defendants, messengers and constables crowded round. To
escape the heat, the sāheb had emerged from his tent and was sitting at a
camp-table in the shade outside. Offering Jaygopal a stool he questioned
him about local affairs. Jaygopal swelled with pride to be given this
privileged position in front of the villagers, and thought, ‘If only the
Chakrabartis and Nandis could see me now!’

It was then that a veiled woman appeared, bringing Nilmani with her,
and stood before the Magistrate. ‘Sāheb,’ she said, ‘I entrust this
orphaned little brother of mine to you: please look after him.’

Seeing for the second time this serious, large-headed little boy, with a
woman who was clearly of good family, the sāheb stood up and said,
‘Come into the tent.’

‘I shall say right here what I have to say,’ said the woman. Jaygopal
went pale and began to fidget. The curious villagers closed in avidly; but
withdrew when the sāheb raised his cane.

Holding her brother’s hand Shashi told his whole story from beginning
to end. From time to time Jaygopal tried to interrupt, but the Magistrate,
flushed with anger, snapped at him to shut up and, pointing with his
cane, directed him to stand up from his stool. Jaygopal stood in silence,
inwardly fuming at Shashi. Nilmani pressed against his sister and
listened open-mouthed.

When Shashi had finished her account the Magistrate asked Jaygopal
some questions, and after hearing his replies fell silent. Then, addressing
Shashi, he said, ‘My dear, although I can’t hear this case myself, you can
rest assured that I shall do what needs to be done. You can return home
with your brother without fear.’

‘So long as he cannot get back the house which is his by rights,’ said
Shashi, ‘I shall not dare to take him there. Only if you keep Nilmani
yourself will he be safe.’

‘Where will you go?’ asked the sāheb.

‘I shall return to my husband’s house. I have nothing to fear.’

With a slight smile, the sāheb gave in. He agreed to take away this
skinny, dark, serious, calm, gentle, amulet-wearing Bengali boy.

As Shashi said goodbye, the boy clung to her sari. ‘Don’t worry, little
chap,’ said the sāheb. ‘Come with me.’

With tears streaming behind her veil, Shashi said, ‘Darling brother, go
now – you’ll see your Didi again.’ Then she embraced him, stroked his
head and back, somehow extricated the end of her sari from his grasp
and swiftly walked away. The sāheb put his left arm round Nilmani, but
he cried out, ‘Didi, Didi!’ Shashi turned once and waved at him with her
right hand, trying to send him silent consolation. Then, heart-broken,
she continued on her way.

Once again husband and wife were reunited in their long-familiar
home. Fated to be united! But this reunion did not last long. For not long
afterwards the villagers heard one morning that Shashi had been smitten
with cholera during the night and had been cremated that very night. No
one made any comment on this. The neighbour Tara would sometimes
shout out what she thought, but people told her to shut up.

When she said goodbye to her brother, Shashi said that he would see
her again. I do not know if that promise has been fulfilled.

