As soon as she learnt to write, Uma caused tremendous trouble. She
would write ‘Rain patters, leaves flutter’ on every wall of the house with
a piece of coal – in great, childish, curving letters. She found the copy of
The Secret Adventures of Haridas that her elder brother’s wife kept
beneath her pillow and wrote in pencil, ‘Black water, red flower’. Most
of the stars and planets in the new almanac that everyone in the house
used were, so to speak, eclipsed by her huge scribbles. In her father’s
daily account-book, in the middle of his calculations, she wrote:

He who learns to write
Drives a horse and cart.

Up to now she had not been interrupted in these literary endeavours; but
at last she met with a dire mishap.

Uma’s elder brother Gobindalal had a very benign look about him, but
he wrote perpetually for the newspapers. None of his friends or relatives
supposed from his conversation that he was a thinker, and indeed one
could not justly accuse him of thinking on any subject. Nevertheless he
wrote – and his opinions were in tune with most readers in Bengal. He
had recently, for example, completed an elegant essay demolishing – by
the spirit of his attack and the exuberance of his language rather than by
logic – some gravely false ideas about anatomy that were current in
European science.

In the quiet of the afternoon, Uma took her brother’s pen and ink and
wrote on the essay in bold letters:

So well-behaved is young Gopal
Whatever you give he eats it all

I don’t believe she meant this to be a dig at the readers of Gobindalal’s
essay, but he was beside himself with rage. First he smacked Uma; then
he took away her pencil-stub, her ink-smeared blunted pen and all her
other carefully accumulated writing implements. The little girl, quite
unable to understand the reason for such disgrace, sat in a corner and
cried her heart out.

When her punishment was finished, Gobindalal softened a little. He
returned the confiscated items, and tried to dispel the little girl’s distress
by giving her a well-bound, nicely ruled exercise-book.

Uma was seven years old at the time. From then on, this exercise-book
was under her pillow every night, and in her lap or under her arm all
day long. When with her hair plaited Uma was taken along by the maid
to the girls’ school in the village, the exercise-book went too. Some of
the girls were intrigued by the book, some coveted it, and some
begrudged her it.

In the first year that she had the exercise-book, she neatly wrote in it:
‘Birds are singing, Night is ending.’1 She would sit on the floor of her
bedroom embracing the exercise-book, chanting out loud and writing.
She accumulated many snatches of prose and rhyme in this way.

In the second year, she wrote some things of her own: very short but
very much to the point: no introduction or conclusion. For example, at
the end of ‘The Tiger and the Crane’ – a story in kathāmālā – a line was
added which is not to be found in that book or anywhere else in Bengali
literature. It was this: ‘I love Yashi very much.’

Let no one suppose that I am about to concoct a love-story! Yashi was
not an eleven-or twelve-year-old local boy: she was an old houseservant, 
whose actual name was Yashoda. But this one sentence should
not be taken as firm proof of Uma’s feelings towards her. Anyone
wanting to write an honest account of the matter would find that the
sentence was fully contradicted two pages later in the exercise-book.

This was not just a stray example: there were blatant contradictions in
Uma’s writings at every step. In one place one could read of her life-long
rift with Hari (not Hari meaning Krishna, but a girl at school called
Haridashi). But something a few lines below suggested there was no one
in the world whom she loved more than Hari.
The next year, when Uma was nine years old, a sānāi began to play one
morning. It was her wedding-day. The groom was called Pyarimohan,
one of Gobindalal’s fellow-writers. Although he was still quite young and
had acquired some education, modern ideas had not penetrated him at
all. He was therefore the darling of the neighbourhood. Gobindalal
adopted him as a model, though not with complete success.

Dressed in a Benares sari, her little face covered with a veil, Uma left
tearfully for her father-in-law’s house. Her mother said, ‘Do what your
mother-in-law tells you, my dear. Do the housework, don’t spend your
time reading and writing.’ And Gobindalal said, ‘Mind that you don’t go
scratching on walls; it’s not that sort of house. And make sure you don’t
scrawl on any of Pyarimohan’s writings.’

Uma’s heart trembled. She realized there would be no mercy in the
house where she was going; she would have to learn after endless
scoldings what things were regarded there as mistakes and faults.

The sānāi sounded on that day too, but I doubt if anyone in that
crowd of wedding-guests really understood what the girl felt in her
trembling heart, behind her veil, Benares sari and ornaments.

Yashi went along with Uma. She was supposed to settle her into her
in-laws’ house, then leave her there. The tender-hearted Yashi, after
much reflection, took Uma’s exercise-book along too. The book was a
piece of her parental home: a much-loved memento of her short
residence in the house of her birth; a brief record of parental affection,
written in round childish letters. It gave her, in the midst of domestic
duties that had come too early, a taste of the cherished freedom that is a
young girl’s due.

For the first few days that she was in her in-laws’ house she did not
write anything – she had no time. But the time came for Yashi to return;
and on the day that she left, Uma shut the door of her bedroom at
midday, took her exercise-book out of her tin box, and tearfully wrote:
‘Yashi has gone home, I shall go back to Mother too.’

Nowadays she had no leisure in which to copy out passages from Easy
Reader or The Dawn of Understanding; maybe she had no inclination
either. So there were no long passages dividing her own childish
writings. Below the sentence mentioned above was written: ‘If only Dādā
could take me home again, I would never spoil his writings again.’

Word had it that Uma’s father sometimes tried to invite her home for
a bit; but Gobindalal and Pyarimohan joined forces to prevent this.
Gobindalal said that now was the time to learn her duties towards her
husband: bringing her back to the old atmosphere of affection would
disturb her quite unnecessarily. He wrote such a shrewd and witty essay
on the subject, that his like-minded readers could not but agree. Uma got
wind of what was happening, and wrote in her exercise-book: ‘Dādā, I
beg you, take me home again just once – I promise not to annoy you.’

One day she was in her room with the door closed, writing something
similarly pointless. Her sister-in-law Tilakmanjari, who was very
inquisitive, decided she must find out what Uma got up to behind her
closed door. When she peeped through a crack and saw her writing, she
was amazed: the Goddess of Learning1 had never before made so secret a
visitation to the female quarters of the house. Her younger sister
Kanakmanjari came and peeped too; and her youngest sister
Anangamanjari – precariously standing on tiptoe to peer at the mysteries
within.

Uma, as she wrote, suddenly heard three familiar voices giggling
outside the room. Realizing what was afoot, she hastily shut the
exercise-book in her box and buried her face in the bedclothes.
Pyarimohan was most perturbed when he was told about what had
been seen. Reading and writing, once started, would lead to play-and
novel-writing, and household norms would be endangered. As he
thought further about the matter, he worked out a most subtle theory.
Perfect marriage was produced by a combination of female and male
power. But if through women’s education female power was weakened,
then male power would prevail unchecked; and the clash between male
and male would be so destructive that marriage would be annihilated,
and women would be widowed. As yet, no one had been able to
challenge this theory.

That evening Pyarimohan came to Uma’s room and gave her a
thorough scolding, and ridiculed her too, saying: ‘So the wife wants to
go to an office with a pen behind her ear? We’ll have to get her a śāmlā!’
Uma could not understand what he meant. She had never read his
articles, so she hadn’t learnt to appreciate his wit. But she was deeply
humiliated, and wished that the earth would swallow her up.

For a long time after she wrote nothing. But one autumn morning she
heard a beggar-woman singing an āgamanī song. She listened quietly,
resting her chin on the bars of the window. The autumn sunshine
brought back so many memories of childhood; hearing an āgamanī song
as well was too much to bear.

Uma could not sing; but ever since she learnt how to write, her habit
had been to write down songs, to make up for not being able to sing
them. This was what the beggar-woman sang that day:

The citizens say to Uma’s mother,
‘Your lost star has returned.’
The Queen runs, madly weeping,
‘Where is Uma, tell me?
My Uma has returned –
Come, my darling,
Let me clasp you to me!’
Stretching her arms,
Hugging her mother’s neck,
Uma chides her, sore at heart:
‘Why did you not send for me?’

With the same soreness of heart, Uma’s eyes filled with tears. She
furtively called the singer over and, shutting the door of her room, began
to make a strangely spelt copy of the song in her exercise-book.

Tilakmanjari, Kanakmanjari and Anangamanjari saw this through the
crack in the door and shouted out, clapping their hands: ‘Baudidi, we’ve
seen everything, Baudidi!’ Uma opened the door and said in great
distress, ‘Dear sisters, don’t tell anyone, please, I beg you. I won’t do it
again, I won’t write again.’ Then she saw that Tilakmanjari had her eye
on the exercise-book. She ran over to it and clasped it to her breast. Her
sisters-in-law struggled to snatch it from her; failing to do so, Ananga
called her brother.

Pyarimohan came and sat down on the bed sternly. ‘Give me that
book,’ he thundered. When his command was not obeyed, he growled in
an even deeper voice, ‘Give it to me.’

The girl held the exercise-book to her breast and looked at her
husband, entreating him with her gaze. When she saw that Pyarimohan
was about to force it from her, she hurled it down, covered her face with
her hands, and fell to the floor.

Pyarimohan picked up the exercise-book and loudly read out from her
childish writings. As she listened, Uma tried to clutch the nethermost
depths of the earth. The other girls collapsed into peals of laughter.

Uma never got the exercise-book back again. Pyarimohan also had an
exercise-book full of various subtly barbed essays, but no one was
philanthropic enough to snatch his book away and destroy it.
