Darjeeling was swathed in rain and cloud when I arrived. I didn’t want
to go outside, but to stay indoors was even more unappealing. Straight
after my hotel breakfast I put on heavy boots and a full-length
mackintosh, and went out for a walk. It was drizzling intermittently, and
the thick pall of cloud all around gave the impression that God was
trying to erase the entire scene, mountains and all, with a rubber.

As I walked along the deserted Calcutta road, I hated these misty
heights and wished I could grasp with all five senses Earth’s busy variety
and colour again. It was then that I heard the pathetic sound of a woman
crying, not far off. Life is so tragic and troubled that the sound of crying
is nothing out of the ordinary, and at any other time I doubt if I would
have looked round; but here amidst the clouds the sound seemed like the
cry of a whole vanished world. I could not ignore it.

I approached, and saw a woman sitting on a rock by the road,
weeping. Her clothes were ochre-coloured, and her matted, lightcoloured 
hair was scooped up into a top-knot. Hers was no recent grief:
long suppressed exhaustion and misery had snapped under the weight of
the clouds and desolation, and had burst out. ‘This is odd,’ I said to
myself. ‘I could base a brilliant story on this. I never thought to see a
sannyāsinī sitting on a mountainside!’ I could not tell which caste she
was. I asked her kindly in Hindi, ‘Who are you? What’s happened to
you?’

At first she did not answer, and merely glanced at me with fiery,
tearful eyes. I spoke again: ‘Don’t be afraid – I’m a gentleman.’ She
smiled then and said in flawless Hindusthani, ‘I’ve been beyond fear and
terror for a long time now – shame, too. Once, Babuji, I lived in such
purdah that even my own brother had to ask for permission to see me.
But nothing hides me from the world now.’

I was rather annoyed. My clothes and manners were those of a sāheb.
Yet this wretched woman addressed me, without hesitation, as ‘Babuji’. I
felt like ditching the story and stumping off in my best sāheb’s manner,
nose in the air and puffing cigarette-smoke like a train. But curiosity got
the better of me. I asked her, tilting my head haughtily, ‘Can I help you?
Do you need anything?’

She stared straight at me, and after a pause replied briefly, ‘I am the
daughter of Golamkader Khan, Nawab of Badraon.’

I had not the slightest idea where Badraon was or who Golamkader
Khan was or why his daughter should be sitting by the Calcutta Road in
Darjeeling and weeping. I didn’t believe her, either, but decided I would
not spoil the fun, or the chance of such a good story. So I made a lengthy
and solemn salaam before her and said, ‘Bibisaheb, forgive me, I did not
know who you were.’ (There are many logical reasons why I did not
know her, the chief one being that I had never seen her before, and on
top of that the mist was so thick it was hard to see one’s own hands and
feet.) ‘Bibisaheb’ did not take offence, and pointing to a rock next to her
said pleasantly, ‘Sit down.’

I could see she was used to giving orders. I felt surprisingly honoured
at being allowed to sit on a wet, hard, mossy rock beside her. The
daughter of Golamkader Khan of Badraon, the Princess Nurunni Shah or
Meherunni Shah or whatever she was called, had graciously given me a
muddy seat by the Calcutta Road in Darjeeling, next to her and at about
the same height! When I set out from the hotel in my mackintosh, I
never dreamt of such a lofty possibility.

It might seem like poetry: a man and a woman mysteriously
conversing on a rocky mountainside. Hot from the pen of a poet, it
would rouse in the reader’s heart the sounds of streams gurgling in
mountain caves, or the wonderful music of Kalidasa’s Meghadūta or
Kumārasambhava. Yet surely there must be few representatives of Young
Bengal1 who would not have felt ridiculous sitting in boots and
mackintosh by the Calcutta Road on a muddy rock with a ragged
Hindusthani lady! But we were wrapped in mist, there was no one to see
us, no cause for embarrassment, no one but the Nawab of Badraon
Golamkader Khan’s daughter and I – a freshly minted Bengali sāheb –
two people on two rocks, like relics of a totally destroyed world. The
great absurdity of our incongruous meeting concerned only our destinies,
no one else’s.

‘Bibisaheb,’ I said, ‘who put you into this state?’

The Princess of Badraon struck her forehead. ‘How can I know how
things are caused? Who is it who hides these huge, harsh mountains in
flimsy clouds?’

I agreed with her, not wishing to start a philosophic debate. ‘Yes
indeed, who knows the mysteries of Fate? We crawl like worms before
them.’

I would have argued, I would not have let Bibisaheb off so lightly –
but my Hindi was insufficient. The little I had learnt from dealing with
watchmen and bearers did not permit me to discuss Fate and Free Will
with a Princess of Badraon or of any other place, sitting by the Calcutta
Road.

Bibisaheb said, ‘The extraordinary story of my life has only just
finished. At your command I shall tell it to you.’

‘Command?’ I said, rather flustered. ‘If you favour me with it I shall be
highly honoured.’

No one should think that I spoke exactly like this, but in Hindi. I
wanted to, but I was not capable of doing so. When Bibisaheb spoke, it
was like a delicate morning breeze stirring a dewy golden cornfield:
there was such easy meekness in her flow of sentences, such beauty. And
I could only reply in blunt, barbarous, broken phrases. I had never
known such effortless excellence of speech; as I talked to Bibisaheb I felt,
for the first time, my own inadequacy.

‘My father,’ she said, ‘had the blood of the Emperor of Delhi in his veins,
and in order to preserve the honour of his family went to great lengths
to find me a suitable husband. A proposal came from the Nawab of
Lucknow: my father was dealing with this when the fighting broke out
between the British and the sepoys over cartridge-biting, and
Hindusthan turned dark with the smoke of cannon-fire.’

I had never before heard Hindusthani spoken by a woman, let alone by a
high-born lady, and as I listened it was clear to me that this was
aristocrat’s language and that the days of this language were over.
Everything today has been lowered, stunted, stripped by the railways
and telegraph, by the hurly-burly of work, by the extinction of the
nobility. As I listened to this nawab’s language amidst the thick mists of
British-built, modern, stony Darjeeling, an imaginary Mogul city arose in
my mind, with huge white marble palaces soaring into the sky, with
long-tailed liveried horses in the streets and elephants with 
goldtasselled howdahs; a city whose people wore many-coloured turbans,
baggy shirts and pyjamas of wool and silk and muslin, with brocade
slippers curled up at the toes, and scimitars tied to their waists; a
leisured, elegant, courteous way of life.

‘Our fort,’ said the Nawab’s daughter, ‘was on the bank of the Yamuna.
Our army-commander was a Hindu Brahmin, called Keshar Lal.’

The woman seemed to pour all the music of her voice into that one
name ‘Keshar Lal’. I laid my walking-stick on the ground and settled
myself into a bolt-upright position.

‘Keshar Lal was a strict Hindu. When I got up in the morning I would
look from the window of the zenana and watch him immerse himself up
to the chest in the Yamuna, watch him circumambulating with hands
cupped in an offering to the rising sun. He would sit with sopping
clothes on the ghāṭ, recite mantras devotedly, and then sing a hymn
clearly and smoothly in Rāg Bhairavī as he walked back to his house.

‘I was a Muslim girl, but I had never been told about my religion and I
did not know its doctrines and practices. Among our menfolk, religious
rules had been weakened by indolence, drinking and self-indulgence;
and in the luxury of the zenana, too, religion was not much alive.

‘God probably implanted in me a natural thirst for religion – I cannot
see how else it was caused. Be that as it may, at the sight of Keshar Lal
performing his rituals in the pure dawn light on the bare white steps
down to the calm blue Yamuna, my hitherto dormant feelings were
seized by a sweet, unspoken devotion.

‘With his regular, disciplined piety, and his fair and supple body,
Keshar Lal was like a smokeless flame: his Brahminical sanctity and
grace chastened the ignorant heart of a Muslim girl with a strange
reverence.

‘I had a Hindu maid who did obeisance before Keshar Lal every day
and took the dust of his feet. The sight of this pleased me but also made
me jealous. On days when special rites were observed, this maid would
also sometimes lay on meals for Brahmins. I offered to help with the cost
of this, saying, “Why not invite Keshar Lal?” She answered in horror,
“Keshar Lal does not take food or gifts from anyone.” It gnawed at my
heart that I could not make any direct or indirect expression of devotion
to Keshar Lal.

‘One of my ancestors had abducted a Brahmin girl and married her. As
I sat inside the zenana, I felt her pure blood in my veins and found some
comfort in thinking I was linked to Keshar Lal by that thread. I listened
to everything my Hindu maid could tell me about Hinduism, its customs
and rules, its amazing tales of gods and goddesses, its marvellous
Rāmāyaṇa and Mahābhārata; as I listened, a wonderful picture of the
Hindu world unfolded before me. Statues and idols, the sounds of bells
and conches, gold-topped temples, the smoke of incense, the scent of
flowers and sandalwood, the unearthly powers of yogis and sannyāsīs,
superhuman Brahmins, the wiles and sports of gods in human disguise:
all combined to create a realm that was supernatural, distant, vast and
immeasurably old. My heart was like a bird without a nest, flying at
dusk from room to room of a huge and ancient palace. To my girlish
mind, the Hindu world was an enchanting fairy-tale kingdom.

‘It was at this time that the fighting broke out between the Company
and the sepoys. Waves of revolt spread even to our small fort. Keshar Lal
said, “The pale-skinned cow-eaters must be driven from Aryavarta!
Hindu and Muslim kings must be free again to gamble for power!”

‘My father Golamkader Khan was a calculating man. “Those damned
English can do the impossible,” he said. “The people of Hindusthan can
never match them. I’m not going to stake this little fort of mine on so
slender a chance. Don’t ask me to fight with the Honourable Company!”

‘At a time when the blood of both Hindus and Muslims was on fire, we
were all enraged by my father’s merchant-like prudence. Even my
mother and step-mothers were stirred. Soon Keshar Lal came with an
armed troop, and said to my father, “Nawabsaheb, if you don’t join us I
shall take you prisoner while the fighting lasts and command the fort
myself.”

‘ “There is no need for that,” said my father. “I’m on your side.”

‘ “Give us some money from your treasury,” said Keshar Lal.

‘My father did not give much. “I’ll give you more when you need it,”
he said.

‘I took my whole array of ornaments, tied them up in a cloth and gave
them to my Hindu maid to take to Keshar Lal. He accepted them. I
tingled with pleasure at this, all over my denuded body.

‘With the scraping and polishing of rusty guns and the sharpening of
ancient swords, Keshar Lal began to get ready. But suddenly, one
afternoon, the District Commissioner arrived: his red-shirted soldiers
stormed into the fort, raising clouds of dust. My father Golamkader Khan
had secretly given him news of the revolt.

‘Keshar Lal commanded such loyalty in the Nawab’s guard that they
fought to the death with their broken guns and blunt swords.

‘My traitorous father’s house was like hell to me. I was bursting with
grief and hatred, but I did not shed a single tear. I dressed in the clothes
of my cowardly brother and escaped from the zenana, while no one was
looking.

‘Dust, gunpowder smoke, the shouting of soldiers and the noise of
guns died down, and the terrible stillness of death settled over land and
water and sky. The sun set, turning the Yamuna red, and a nearly full
moon hung in the evening sky. The battlefield was strewn with hideous
scenes of death. At any other time my heart would have been pierced by
the pity of it, but instead I wandered around as if in a trance, trying to
find Keshar Lal – no other aim had meaning for me. I searched until, in
the middle of the night, in bright moonlight, not far from the battlefield,
on the bank of the Yamuna, in the shade of a mango-grove, I came
across the dead bodies of Keshar Lal and his loyal batman. I could see
that – appallingly wounded – either master had carried servant or
servant had carried master from the battlefield to this place of safety,
where they had quietly given themselves up to Death.

‘The first thing I did was fulfil the craving I had had for so long to
abase myself before Keshar Lal. I fell to my knees beside him, loosed my
long tresses, and fervently rubbed the dust from his feet. I raised his 
icecold soles to my feverish forehead, and kissed them; months of
suppressed tears welled up. But then his body moved, and a weak groan
emerged from his lips. I drew back in alarm at the sound. With closed
eyes and parched voice he murmured, “Water.”

‘I ran to the Yamuna – returned with my clothes soaking wet. I wrung
the water out over Keshar Lal’s half-open lips, and tore wet strips of
cloth to bind the ghastly wound that had destroyed his left eye. I
brought him water a few more times in this way, and as I moistened his
face and eyes he slowly regained some consciousness. “Shall I give you
more water?” I asked.

‘ “Who are you?” said Keshar Lal.

‘I could not hold back any more and said, “I am your humble, devoted
servant. I am the daughter of Golamkader Khan, the Nawab.” At least he
would die knowing my devotion to him! No one could deprive me of the
joy of that feeling.

‘But as soon as he heard who I was he roared out like a lion,
“Daughter of an arch-traitor! Heretic! You, a Muslim, have profaned my
religion by giving me water at my time of death!” He struck me a heavy
blow on my cheek with his right hand: everything swam before my eyes
and I nearly fainted.

‘I was sixteen years old and this was the first time I had been out of
the zenana; the greedy heat of the sun had not yet stolen the luscious
pink of my cheeks; but this was the first greeting I received from the
outside world, from my one idol in the world!’

My cigarette had gone out. All this time I had sat like a figure in a
painting – so engrossed that I knew not whether it was words or music
that I heard. I had said nothing myself. But now at last I burst out,
‘Animal!’

‘Animal?’ said the Nawab’s daughter. ‘Would a dying animal refuse a
drop of water?’

Embarrassed, I said, ‘Maybe not. He was a god, then.’

‘What sort of god?’ said the Princess. ‘Would a god reject the service
of an eager and devoted heart?’

‘Indeed not,’ I said, and fell silent again.

‘At first,’ continued the Princess, ‘I was devastated. I felt as if the world
had collapsed over my head. But I quickly recovered myself, bowed from
a distance before that harsh, cruel, high-minded Brahmin, and said to
myself, “O Brahmin, you accept neither the service of the wretched, nor
food from another’s hand, nor the gifts of the wealthy, nor the youth of a
girl, nor the love of a woman: you are separate, alone, aloof, distant. I
have no right at all to offer my soul to you.”

‘I cannot say what Keshar Lal thought when he saw the daughter of
the Nawab bowing down before him till her head touched the dust, but
there was no surprise or change of expression in his face. He looked at
me calmly; then, very slowly, stood up. I anxiously stretched out my arm
to support him, but he silently refused it, and with great difficulty
staggered to the bank of the Yamuna. A ferry was moored there. There
was no one to cross and no one to take anyone across. Keshar Lal
boarded the boat and untied the mooring-rope: the boat quickly drifted
to the middle of the stream and gradually faded from view. I longed with
all the force of my feelings, youth and unrequited devotion to make a
last obeisance before that boat and drown: to end this futile life of mine
in the waveless, moonlit Yamuna, in the still night, like a bud shed
before it could bloom.

‘But I could not do that. The moon in the sky, the dense black woods
on the bank, the inky-blue unruffled waters, the towers of our fortress
glittering above the mango-grove in the moonlight, sang together a
silent, solemn song of death; heaven, earth and the nether world that
night, by their moon-and-star-studded stillness, told me with one voice
to die. But a frail invisible boat, on the calm breast of the Yamuna,
dragged me from the moonlit night’s soothing, ever-bewitching spell of
death and back to the path of life. I followed the bank of the river like a
sleepwalker, sometimes through clumps of reeds, sometimes over
sandbanks, sometimes over rugged broken-up beaches, sometimes
through scarcely penetrable thickets.’

She fell silent here. I also said nothing. After a long pause the Nawab’s
daughter said, ‘What happened after this was very complicated. I don’t
know how to break it up and describe it clearly to you. I wandered
through a thick forest, but I can’t remember which path I took when.
Where shall I begin? Where shall I end? What shall I leave out? What
shall I keep in? How can I make the whole story clear so that it won’t
seem impossible or preposterous or unnatural?

‘During this period of my life I realized that nothing is impossible or
unattainable. To a young girl from a nawab’s zenana the outside world
might seem totally forbidding, but that is an illusion: if one once steps
out, a way through will be found. This path is not a nawab’s path; but it
is a path by which people have always come. It is rugged, weird and
uncharted, full of branchings and divisions, fraught with agony and
ecstasy, obstacles and obstructions; but it is a path.

‘An account of a princess’s long, solitary journey along this inevitable
path would not be pleasant to listen to, and even if it was I have no wish
to tell it. In a word, I endured many trials and dangers and indignities;
yet life was not unbearable. Like a firework, the more I burned the more
wildly I moved; so long as I kept moving I did not feel I was burning. But
now at last the flame of my pain and joy has gone out, and I find myself
lying like a dumb thing in the roadside dust. My journey is over; my
story is finished.’

With this the Nawab’s daughter stopped. I mentally shook my head: the
story was surely not yet over. I was silent for a while, then said in broken
Hindi, ‘Forgive my rudeness, but if you would speak a little more openly
about the last part of your story my impudent curiosity would be greatly
eased.’

The Nawab’s daughter smiled. No doubt my broken Hindi helped. If I
had been able to speak Hindi properly, she would not have been so frank
with me: the fact that I knew so little of her mother tongue created a
space between us, a protective veil.

She began again. ‘I often got news of Keshar Lal, but in no way could I
get to meet him. He had joined Tatya Tope’s army,1 and kept appearing
and disappearing like a bolt of thunder from a sky that was still dark
with revolt: sometimes to the east, sometimes to the west, sometimes to
the north-east, sometimes to the southwest.

‘I was by then dressed as a yoginī, and studying the Sanskrit Shastras
in Benares with Shibananda Swami, my spiritual father. News from all
over India reached him: I devotedly learnt the Shastras, and at the same
time eagerly lapped up news of the war.

‘Gradually the British Raj stamped out the flames of revolution in
Hindusthan. There was no more news of Keshar Lal. All the heroic
figures, right across India, who had been glimpsed in the bloody light of
battle, were eclipsed. I could hold myself no longer. I left the protection
of my guru, and went out in the world again, dressed as a devotee of
Shiva. I wandered from road to road, shrine to shrine, to ashrams and
temples, but found no news of Keshar Lal anywhere. Some who knew his
name said, “He must have died in the fighting or been executed.” My
heart said, “That can never be: Keshar Lal cannot die. He is a Brahmin;
that blazing invincible fire can never be put out; it is still burning
brightly on a lonely, remote, ritual hearth, waiting for me to sacrifice
myself to it.”

‘It is said in the Hindu Shastras that through meditation and austerity
a Shudra can become Brahmin; there is no mention of a Muslim
becoming a Brahmin, for the simple reason that there were no Muslims
at that time. I knew it would be a long time before I could be united
with Keshar Lal, because first I had to become a Brahmin. Thirty long
years went by. I became a Brahmin inside and out; in habit and
behaviour; in body, mind and speech. The blood of my Brahmin
grandmother flowed through my body with unmixed energy; I acquired
a strange mental fire, by abasing myself totally before the first and last
Brahmin of my adolescence and youth, for me the only Brahmin in the
world.

‘I had heard a lot about Keshar Lal’s heroism in the revolutionary war,
but that was not what imprinted itself on my heart. What I saw was
Keshar Lal floating out alone in a little boat into the calm central stream
of the Yamuna, in the silent moonlight: that was the picture that
obsessed me. I saw nothing but this, day and night: a Brahmin floating
away on the empty stream towards some undefined mystery – with no
companion, no servant, no need of anyone; immersed in the purity of his
soul, complete in himself; with the planets, moon and stars watching
him silently.

‘Then I heard that Keshar Lal had escaped execution and taken refuge
in Nepal. I went there. After living there for many months I heard that
he had left Nepal a long time before and had gone nobody knew where.

‘I wandered through the mountains. This was not a Hindu land: it was
a land of Bhutanese and Lepchas with their weird beliefs; there was no
orthodoxy in their diet and behaviour; their gods and styles of worship
were completely alien; I was terrified of the slightest desecration of the
holiness I had acquired through years of spiritual endeavour. I took great
pains to avoid being touched by anything unclean. I knew that my boat
was nearly at the shore, that my life’s supreme goal was not far off.

‘What shall I say of what happened next? The end of the story is very
brief. When a lamp is about to go out it can be extinguished with a
single puff. I need not elaborate. After thirty-eight years, I have arrived
in Darjeeling. I saw Keshar Lal this morning.’

She fell silent again, so I asked her eagerly, ‘What did you see?’

‘I saw,’ said the Nawab’s daughter, ‘an aged Keshar Lal in a Bhutanese
village with his Bhutanese wife, sitting in a filthy yard with their
grandchildren born of her, picking grain out of maize.’

Her story was finished. I thought I ought to offer some word of
consolation. ‘How can anyone,’ I said, ‘who has had to survive amidst
strangers for thirty-eight years, stick to his religious rules?’

‘You think I don’t understand that?’ said the Nawab’s daughter. ‘But
why was I so deluded for so long? Why didn’t I know that the
Brahminism that stole away my young heart was nothing but custom
and superstition? I thought it was dharma, unending and eternal. How
else could I – after being so shamefully rejected when I offered on that
moonlit night my freshly bloomed body and heart and soul, trembling
with devotion, after leaving my father’s house for the first time at the
age of sixteen – how else could I have silently accepted the insult as a
kind of initiation by a guru, and meekly dedicated myself to him with
redoubled devotion? Alas, Brahmin, you exchanged one set of habits for
another, but I gave away my life and youth, and how can I get them
back again?’

The woman stood up and said, ‘Namaskār, Babuji!’ Then a moment
later she said, as if correcting herself, ‘Salaam Babusaheb!’ With this
Muslim valediction she took her leave, as it were, of the Brahminism
whose foundations had crumbled to the dust. Before I could say
anything, she disappeared like a cloud into the mists that swirled round
these icy mountain-tops.

I shut my eyes for a while and let all she had described roll through
my mind. I saw the young, sixteen-year-old Nawab’s daughter sitting on
a fine carpet in her room overlooking the Yamuna; I saw the statuesque
figure of a yoginī rapt in ecstatic devotion during evening worship in a
place of pilgrimage; and then I saw also an image of heart-broken
disillusionment in an older woman, shrouded in mist, on the edge of the
Calcutta Road in Darjeeling; and the poignant music of beautiful, pure
Urdu, formed by the clash of Brahmin and Muslim blood flowing
through this woman in opposite ways, reverberated in my mind.

I opened my eyes. The clouds had parted, and the clear sky was bright
with gentle sunshine. Englishwomen in hand-pushed carts and
Englishmen on horseback were out taking the air. There were one or two
Bengalis too, casting amused glances at me from faces swathed in
scarves.

I got up quickly, and in the bright light of this sunny world I could no
longer believe in the stormy story I had heard. My imagination had
made it up, out of mist mixed with ample tobacco-smoke. That 
MuslimBrahmin woman, that Brahmin hero, that fort on the bank of the
Yamuna, had perhaps no truth in them at all.
