One morning two young boys were standing by the roadside laying bets
on an extremely daring enterprise. They were debating whether it was
possible to take some flowers from the mādhabī-creeper in the temple
compound. One of the boys was saying that he would be able to do it,
and the other was saying, ‘You never will.’ To understand why this was
easy to talk about but not so easy to do requires a fuller explanation.

Jaykali Devi, widow of the late Madhabchandra Tarkabachaspati, was
the guardian of the temple, which was dedicated to the Blessed Lord
Krishna. Her husband had been given the title ‘Tarkabachaspati’ (‘Master
of Debate’) in his capacity as teacher at the village ṭol, but had never
been able to prove to his wife that he deserved it. Some pundits were of
the opinion that, because talking and arguing were his wife’s preserve,
he amply merited the title by virtue of being her ‘Master’.1 Actually,
Jaykali did not say very much; she could stop even the mightiest verbal
torrents with a couple of words or by saying nothing at all.

Jaykali was a tall, strong, sharp-nosed, tough-minded woman.
Through her husband’s mismanagement, property endowed to them for
the maintenance of the temple had almost been lost. His widow, by
collecting all the arrears, fixing new limits, and recovering claims that
had lapsed for many years, had managed to get everything straight
again. No one could do her out of a single paisa.

Because this woman had many of the qualities of a man, she had no
female friends. Women were terrified of her. Gossip, small talk and tears
were all anathema to her. Men were afraid of her too, because she could
rebuke the bottomless idleness of the men of the village with a stare so
fierce and silently contemptuous that it pierced their fat inertia, cut
them to the quick. She had a remarkable capacity for contempt and a
remarkable capacity for conveying contempt. Anyone she judged to be at
fault, she could blast with her manner and expression, with a word or
with no word. She kept close tabs on everything that happened in the
village, good or bad. She effortlessly dominated all its affairs. Wherever
she went she was in charge: neither she nor anyone doubted it.

She was expert in nursing the sick, but her patients feared her as
much as death. If anyone broke the treatment or diet she prescribed, her
anger was hotter than the fever itself. Her tall, strict presence hung over
the village like the Judgement of God; no one loved her, yet no one
dared to defy her. She knew everyone, yet no one was as isolated as she.

The widow had no children, but she had taken on the upbringing of
two orphaned nephews. No one could say that the lack of a male parent
had deprived them of discipline, or that they had been spoilt by blind
affection from their aunt. The elder of them was now eighteen. From
time to time the question of his marriage arose, and the boy was not
averse to the bonds of love. But his aunt’s mind was shut to that happy
prospect. Unlike other women, she did not find the blooming of love in a
young married couple particularly pleasing to contemplate. On the
contrary, it was to her unpleasantly likely that, like other married men,
her nephew would sit about the house, growing fatter by the day as his
wife pampered him. No, she said, Pulin had better start earning – then
he could bring a wife into the house. Neighbours were shocked by her
harsh words.

The temple was Jaykali’s most precious possession. She was never
remiss in tending, dressing and bathing the deity. The two attendant
Brahmins feared her far more than the god himself. Formerly the god
had not received his full rations, because there was another object of
worship living secretly in the temple, a ‘temple-maid’ called Nistarini.
Offerings of ghee, milk, curds and butter were shared between heaven
and hell. But under Jaykali’s iron rule, offerings were enjoyed in full by
the deity. Lesser gods had to find means of support elsewhere.

The widow made sure that the courtyard of the temple stayed
spotlessly clean – not a blade of grass anywhere. On a trellis to one side
there was a mādhabī-creeper: whenever it shed dry leaves, Jaykali
removed them. She could not bear the slightest invasion of the sanctity,
cleanliness and orderliness of the temple. Previously local boys playing
hide-and-seek had hidden inside the courtyard, and sometimes baby
goats came and chewed at the bark of the mādhabī. There was no chance
of that now. Except on festival-days, boys were not permitted to enter
the courtyard, and hungry little goats, beaten by sticks, had to run
bleating to their mothers.

Irreverent persons, even if they were close relatives, were not allowed
to enter the temple yard. Her brother-in-law, who liked eating 
chickenmeat cooked by Muslims, had come to the village once to see his
relations, and had wanted to visit the temple; Jaykali objected so
violently, there had nearly been a complete rift between her and her
elder sister. The excessive zeal with which the widow watched over the
temple seemed quite crazy to ordinary people.

Whereas in other spheres Jaykali was harsh and haughty and
independent, in her care of the temple she surrendered herself
completely. To the image inside it she was mother, wife and slave: she
treated it with watchfulness, tenderness, grace and humility. The stone
temple with its stone image was the only thing that brought out her
femininity. It was her husband and son: her entire world.

Readers will now appreciate what limitless courage was required to
steal mādhabī-blossoms from the temple courtyard. The boy concerned
was Nalin, the younger of her nephews. He knew what his aunt was like,
but discipline had not tamed him. He was drawn to anything risky, and
was always eager to break restrictions. It was said that in childhood his
aunt had been like that too.

Jaykali was, at the time, sitting on her verandah telling her rosary,
gazing with motherly love and devotion at the image of the deity. The
boy crept up from behind and stood underneath the mādhabī. He found
that the flowers on the lower branches had all been used for pūjā. So he
gingerly started to climb the trellis. Seeing some buds on a high branch,
he stretched with the whole length of his body and arm to pick them;
but the strain on the frail trellis was too great, and it noisily collapsed.
Boy and creeper fell sprawling on the ground together.

This glorious feat brought Jaykali running: she grabbed him by the
arms and wrenched him up from the ground. He had been knocked
badly by his fall, but one could not call this a punishment, because it
had not come from a living thing. So now Jaykali’s living punishment
rained down on the boy’s bruised body. He suffered it in silence, without
a single tear. His aunt then dragged him into a room and bolted the
door. He was given no food that afternoon. Hearing this, the servant-girl
Mokshada begged – tearfully and with trembling voice – that the boy be
forgiven. Jaykali would not be moved. No one in the house dared give
food to the hungry boy behind Jaykali’s back.

The widow sent for men to repair the trellis, and once again took her
seat on the verandah with her rosary in hand. A little later Mokshada
came up to her and said timorously, ‘Thākurmā, the young master is
weeping with hunger: shall I give him some milk?’

‘No,’ said Jaykali with her face set. Mokshada withdrew again. From
the room in the hut near by Nalin’s plaintive whimpering gradually
swelled into wails of anger – until, much later, he was too exhausted to
go on, and only an occasional panting sob reached the ears of his aunt as
she sat telling her rosary.

Nalin’s distress had subsided into exhausted near-silence when the
sounds of another unhappy creature – mixed with the distant noise of
people running and shouting – loudly disturbed the road outside the
temple. Suddenly footsteps were heard in the temple yard. Jaykali
turned and saw something heaving under the creeper. ‘Nalin!’ she
shouted furiously. No one replied. She thought that Nalin must have
somehow escaped from his prison and was trying to enrage her again.
She stepped down into the yard, with her lips grimly clenched. ‘Nalin!’
she shouted again as she neared the creeper. There was still no answer.
Lifting up a branch, she saw an extremely dirty and frightened pig
lurking in the thick foliage.

The creeper that was a modest substitute, in this brick-built courtyard,
for the groves of Vrindavan, the scent of whose blossoms recalled the
fragrant breath of the gopīs and evoked a gorgeous dream of dalliance
along the banks of the Yamuna – to think that the sacredness of it,
tended by the widow with total devotion, had been suddenly desecrated
by this sordid event! An attendant Brahmin came with a stick to drive
out the pig, but Jaykali rushed to stop him, and bolted the gate of the
temple from inside.

A short while later a crowd of drunken Doms arrived at the temple
gate and began to clamour for the animal they intended to sacrifice.
‘Clear off, you scum,’ shouted Jaykali from behind the closed gate. ‘Don’t
you dare besmirch my temple.’

The crowd dispersed. Even though they had as good as seen it with
their own eyes, it was beyond belief that Mā Jaykali had given asylum to
an unclean animal inside her Krishna temple.

The great god of all mortal creatures was delighted at this odd little
episode, even if the petty god of mean and narrow social custom was
mightily outraged.

