Gopinath Shil’s wife Giribala lived on the top floor of Ramanath Shil’s
three-storey house. There were tubs of bel-flowers and roses outside the
southern door of her bedroom. The roof had a high parapet around it,
with spaces between the bricks so that one could look at the view. The
bedroom was hung with engravings of foreign ladies in various states of
dress and undress; but the reflection of the sixteen-year-old Giribala in
the large mirror opposite the door was not inferior to any of the pictures
on the wall.

Giribala’s beauty was like a sudden ray of light, a surprise, an
awakening, a shock. It could be quite overwhelming. One felt on seeing
her, ‘I was not prepared for this. She is absolutely different from what I
see around me all the time.’ And she herself was thrilled by her own
beauty. Her body seemed brimful of youth, like foaming wine in a
beaker – overflowing in her dress and ornaments, movements, gestures,
the tilt of her neck, the dance of her steps, the jingle of her bracelets and
anklets, her laugh, her sharp retorts, her brilliant glances.

She was drunk with the wine of her beauty. She was often seen
restlessly pacing on her roof, draped in brightly coloured clothes: as if
she wished to dance with every limb to an unexpressed tune in her
mind. She had a kind of joy, driving and hurling her body into
movement; she seemed to receive from the various facets of her beauty a
strange pulsation, a throbbing in her blood. She would tear a leaf off a
plant, raise it high and release it on the breeze: the graceful curve of her
arm soared towards the clouds like an unseen bird released from a cage,
while her bangles tinkled and her sari slipped from her shoulder. Or else
she would pick up a clod from a tub and pointlessly scatter it about; or
standing on tiptoe glance through the spaces in the wall at the great
world beyond; or spin her sari-end around her, so that the keys that
were tied to it jingled. Maybe she would go to the mirror, unbind her
hair and whimsically plait it again – tying the hair at the root with a
string, holding the end of the string in her jasmine-white teeth, and
lifting her arms behind her head to coil the plaits up tightly. With
nothing to do next, she would spread herself out on the soft bed, like
moonlight shining through leaves.

She had no children; nor in this wealthy home did she have any
housework. Alone every day like this, it was becoming impossible for her
to contain herself. She had a husband, but he was outside her control. It
had somehow escaped his notice that she had grown out of her
childhood so fully.

She had, on the contrary, received his affection when she was a child.
He had played truant from school, evaded his dozing guardians, to come
and flirt with his girlish young bride. Even though they lived in the same
house, he wrote her letters on fancy notepaper, showing them proudly to
his schoolfriends. His feelings were amorous enough to be ruffled by
clashes with his wife over small or imaginary matters.

Since then, his father had died and Gopinath had himself become
master of the house. Unseasoned planks are soon attacked by
woodworm. Gopinath had gained independence early: there were many
pests to fasten themselves on to him. His visits to the inner part of the
house became rarer as he roved further and further afield.

To be a leader is exciting; society can be a potent drug. The desire
that Napoleon had to extend his influence over men and history can be
felt on a smaller scale in the drawing-room. It is marvellously exciting to
create and bind together with crude wit an admiring circle of cronies, to
lord it over them and win their applause. Many are willing to embrace
debt and scandal and ruin to obtain this.

Gopinath found it thrilling to be a leader. Each day, new feats of wit
brought him ever greater glory. In the eyes of his followers, his repartee
was unparalleled. Blinded by vanity and excitement to all other duties
and feelings, he abandoned himself completely to a ceaseless social
whirl.

Meanwhile Giribala, imperiously beautiful, ruled a realm without
subjects from her bedroom’s desolate throne. She knew that God had
given her a sceptre; she knew she could conquer with a glance the vast
world she could see through the gaps in the parapet – yet no one in the
world was hers.

She had a pert and witty servant called Sudhamukhi – Sudho for short
– who could sing, dance, make up verses, celebrate Giribala’s beauty and
rail that it was wasted on so boorish a husband. Giribala leant on her
utterly. She would wallow in Sudho’s praise of her face, figure and
complexion; sometimes she demurred, took pleasure in rebuking her for
flattery – but when Sudho swore by her opinion, Giribala easily believed
her. When Sudho sang, ‘I have signed myself in bondage at your feet’,
Giribala took this as a hymn to her own flawless, lac-painted feet, and
imagined a lover rolling before them. But alas, despite the victorious
jingle of her anklets as she strode to and fro on her empty roof, no lover
came to enslave himself to those feet.

Gopinath, however, was enslaved to Labanga, who acted at the
theatre. She was wonderful at swooning on stage, and whenever she
broke into artificial tears, nasally sobbing ‘Lord of my life, Lord of my
soul’, the audience in their long stockings and waistcoats worn over
dhotis would roar, ‘Excellent, excellent.

Giribala had often heard descriptions of Labanga’s extraordinary
talent from her husband (he still came to her occasionally). She did not
know the full extent of his infatuation, but she felt jealous all the same.
She could not bear to think that another woman had charms and
accomplishments which she lacked. She frequently asked, with jealous
curiosity, to be taken to the theatre; but her husband refused.

Finally one day she gave Sudho some money and sent her there. When
she came back, she spoke of the actresses with disgust, frowning,
screwing up her nose. Really, in God’s name, they should be beaten on
the brow with a broomstick, and men who fell for their ugly figures and
phoney movements deserved the same treatment! This reassured
Giribala a little. But with her husband virtually cut off from her now, her
doubts returned. She voiced them to Sudho, who swore on her life that
Labanga was as ugly as a burnt stick dressed in rags. Giribala, unable to
see what her husband saw in the actress, smarted with this blow to her
pride.

In the end one evening she secretly went to the theatre with Sudho.
Forbidden acts are thrilling! The soft throbbing in her arteries made the
brightly lit, crowded stage – filled with music, surrounded by spectators
– all the more wondrous to behold. Instead of her lonely, cheerless room,
here was a festive world, gorgeous, beautiful. It was like a dream.

The musical play ‘Fury Appeased’1 was being performed that day. The
warning bell rang, the band stopped playing, the eager spectators fell
silent for a moment, the footlights brightened, the curtain rose, a troupe
of girls beautifully dressed as the milkmaids of Vraj danced to musical
accompaniment, the theatre resounded with bursts of clapping and roars
of approval from the audience – and Giribala’s youthful blood surged.
The rhythm of the music, the lights, the brilliant costumes and the bursts
of applause made her forget for a moment her whole domestic world.
She had found a place of beautiful, unfettered liberty.

Sudho edged up to her at intervals and whispered nervously,
‘Bauthākrun, it’s time to go home. If the Master finds out, we’ll be done
for!’ Giribala took no notice. Nothing frightened her now.

The performance neared its climax. Radha was in an almighty huff;
Krishna was thrashing hopelessly – his moans and appeals were getting
him nowhere. Giribala seethed with outrage, felt as exultant as Radha
herself at Krishna’s discomfiture. No one ever assailed her like this –
neglected, deserted wife that she was; but how thrilling it was to realize
that she too could make a lover groan! She had heard that beauty could
be ruthless, had guessed how it might be so: now, in the light and music
of the stage, she saw its power in action. It set her brain on fire.

At last the curtain fell, the gas lights dimmed, the audience started to
leave; Giribala sat in a trance. She had no thought of leaving the theatre
to return home. The performance would surely go on for ever! The
curtain would rise again, Krishna would be crushed by Radha; nothing
else was conceivable. ‘Bauthākrun,’ said Sudho, ‘what are you doing?
Come on! They’re turning out the lights!’

Late that night Giribala returned to her room. A lamp flickered in a
corner; there was not a soul or a sound – just an old mosquito-net
stirring in the breeze above the empty bed. Life seemed horribly mean
and trivial. Where was that brightly lit musical realm, where she could
reign at the world’s centre, dispensing her greatness, where she would
no longer be merely an unknown, unloved, insignificant, ordinary
woman.

From now on she went to the theatre each week. Gradually the
rapture of her first visit faded: she could now detect the make-up of the
actors and actresses’ faces, the lack of real beauty, the falseness of the
acting; but she remained addicted to it. Like a warrior thrilling to the
sound of martial music, her heart leapt each time the curtain went up.
For an Empress of Beauty, what throne was more magical than this high,
enchanting stage, separate from the world, lettered in gold, adorned
with scene-paintings, strung with a fabulous web of music and poetry,
pressed by enraptured spectators, pregnant with off-stage mysteries,
revealed to all by garlands of brilliant lights?

On the night that she first saw her husband at the theatre, loudly
appreciating one of the actresses, how she despised him! She decided
bitterly that if the day came when her husband, lured by her beauty,
were to fall at her feet like a scorched insect, enabling her to walk away
grandly, her very toenails shining with contempt, only then would her
wasted beauty and youth be avenged! But how could such a day come?
She hardly saw him now. She had no idea of his movements, where he
went to with his gang of followers, driving them on like dust before a
storm.

On a night of full moon in Caitra, Giribala, dressed in the light-orange
colours of the spring, sat on her roof, the end of her sari floating in the
breeze. Though her husband never came to her, Giribala had not given
up her constant changes of clothes and ornaments. Jewels created a
stunning effect when she wore them – a gleaming, tinkling aura around
her. Today she wore armlets, a necklace of rubies and pearls, and a
sapphire ring on her left little finger. Sudho sat by her and sometimes
stroked her soft, perfect lotus-pink feet, saying with artless eagerness, ‘O
Bauṭhākrun, if I were a man I would clasp these feet to my breast and
die!’ Giribala laughed haughtily and said, ‘You would die before that, for
I’d kick you away! Stop blabbering. Sing me that song.’ On the quiet and
moonlit roof-top, Sudho sang:

I have signed myself in bondage at your feet.
Let all in Vrindavan witness it!

It was ten o’clock at night. Everyone had finished their dinner and gone
to bed. Suddenly Gopinath appeared, smeared with pomatum, silk scarf
flowing; and Sudho, mightily flustered, hastily pulled down her veil and
fled.

‘My day has come,’ thought Giribala to herself. She did not look up.
She sat as still as Radha, proud and dignified. But the curtain did not
rise, Krishna did not roll at her feet in his head-dress of peacock feathers,
no one burst out singing, ‘Why darken the moon by hiding your face?’ In
a gruff and tuneless voice, Gopinath said, ‘The key please.’

On a moonlit spring night like this, after so long a separation, that
these should be his first words! Was all that was written in poems, plays
and novels utterly false? On the stage, the lover would have come with a
song and fallen at his lady-love’s feet; her husband as a member of the
audience would have melted at the scene – but here he was on a roof on
a spring night, saying to his matchless young wife, ‘The key please.’ No
music, no love, no magic, no sweetness – it was so utterly banal!

The breeze sighed heavily now – pained, so it seemed, by this insult to
all the world’s poetry. Fragrance spread across the roof from the tubs of
bel-flowers; Giribala’s unbound tresses blew across her face and eyes; her
scented spring-coloured sari fluttered uneasily. She swallowed her pride
and stood up. Taking her husband’s hand, she said, ‘Come into the
bedroom – I’ll give you the key.’ Today her crying would make him cry,
her lonely fantasies would be fulfilled, her divine weapons would be used
and would triumph! She was sure. ‘I haven’t got long to wait,’ said
Gopinath. ‘Give me the key.’

‘I’ll give you the key and everything it locks,’ said Giribala. ‘But
tonight I shan’t let you go out.’

‘That’s impossible,’ said Gopinath. ‘I’ve got to go.’

‘Then I shan’t give you the key,’ said Giribala.

‘You’ll give it or else!’ said Gopinath. ‘Just you try not to give it to
me.’ He noticed then that there were no keys tied to the end of her sari.
He went into the bedroom, pulled open the dressing-table drawer: no
keys there either. He broke open her hairdressing box, found collyrium,
vermilion, hair-string and other things – but no key. He rumpled the
bedding, upturned the mattress, smashed the cupboard, ransacked the
whole room.

Giribala stood in silence, gripping the door and looking out at the
roof. Seething with rage and frustration, Gopinath shouted, ‘I’m telling
you to give me the key, or there’ll be trouble.’ She made no reply. He
then grabbed hold of her, wrenched off her armlets, her necklace and
rings, kicked her, and left.

No one in the house woke up; no one near by knew anything; the
moonlit night remained as still as ever; peace seemed to reign unbroken.
But if the pounding in Giribala’s heart could have been heard outside,
the serene and moonlit Caitra night would have been split through and
through with a fierce howl of agony. Such total silence; such fearful
heart-break!

All nights end, even this. Giribala could not reveal – even to Sudho –
her shame and defeat. She thought of killing herself, of tearing to shreds
her incomparable beauty, to avenge her loveless state. But she realized
that nothing would be gained by that: the world would remain
unaffected, no one would feel the loss. There was no pleasure in living,
but no consolation in dying.

‘I shall go back to my parents,’ said Giribala. Her parents’ house was a
long way from Calcutta. Everyone told her not to go, but she listened to
no one and took no one with her. And meanwhile Gopinath too went off
on a boat-trip with his cronies – no one knew where.

II
Gopinath attended nearly every performance at the Gandharva Theatre.
Labanga was playing the title-role in Manorama; and Gopinath and his
followers sat in the front row and cheered and threw pouches of money
on to the stage. The noise they made was sometimes very annoying to
the rest of the audience. But the theatre-managers never had the courage
to stop them.

One day Gopinath, rather the worse for drink, got into the Green
Room and caused complete uproar. He somehow thought he had been
slighted by one of the actresses, and was now assaulting her. The whole
theatre was aroused by the actress’s screams and Gopinath’s stream of
abuse. This was more than the managers could stand. The police were
called to throw him out.

Gopinath was determined to get his own back for this insult. A month
before the pūjā-holiday, the managers announced – with great publicity
– further performances of Manorama. Calcutta was festooned with
playbills; it was as if the goddess of the city was wearing a nāmābali with
the author’s name inscribed. But meanwhile Labanga, the leading actress
in the play, disappeared, whisked away on a boat-trip by Gopinath.

The theatre-managers were completely flummoxed. They waited for
some days, but eventually had to rehearse a new actress in the role of
Manorama, delaying the opening night. Not that this did much harm.
The theatre was full to bursting. Hundreds of people had to be turned
away at the door. The critics were ecstatic – and news of this reached
Gopinath, far away though he was. He could not keep away any longer.
Consumed with curiosity, he returned to Calcutta to see the play.

In the first half, the curtain rose on Manorama in her in-laws’ house,
meanly dressed like a servant, going about her housework in furtive,
cowed, timid fashion, saying nothing and hiding her face. In the second,
her greedy husband had sent her back to her parents’ house so that he
could marry a millionaire’s daughter. On examining his new bride after
the wedding, he found she was Manorama again, this time dressed not as
a servant but as a princess: her incomparable beauty, decked in jewels
and finery, shone all around. In childhood she had been stolen from her
rich parents’ home and brought up in poverty. Many years later, her
father had found her again, and brought her back to his house. Now,
with new lavishness, she was married to her husband for the second
time. A post-wedding ‘Fury Appeased’ scene now began.

But all hell had broken loose in the audience. While Manorama’s face
had been hidden by a servant’s dirty veil, Gopinath had sat quietly. But
when she stood up in the bridal chamber, in all her beauty, unveiled,
dressed in red, glittering with jewels, inclining her head with
indescribable hauteur, directing at all, but especially at Gopinath, a
fiercely contemptuous stare, sharp as lightning, so that all the hearts of
the audience leapt and the whole theatre rocked with a barrage of
applause: it was then that Gopinath jumped up and yelled, ‘Giribala,
Giribala!’ He ran and tried to leap on to the stage – but the musicians
restrained him.

Outraged by this interruption to their pleasure, the audience shouted
in English and Bengali, ‘Get him out, throw him out.’

Choking like a madman, Gopinath screamed, ‘I’ll kill her, I’ll kill her.’

The police came and ragged him from the theatre. All of Calcutta
continued to feast their eyes on Giribala’s performance; all except for
Gopinath.

