Matilal Babu, zamindar of Kathaliya, was returning home with his family
by boat. One afternoon he moored the boat near a riverside market so
that their meal could be prepared. A Brahmin boy came over and asked,
‘Where are you going, Babu?’ The boy was not more than fifteen or
sixteen.

‘Kathaliya,’ replied Matilal Babu.

‘Could you drop me at Nandigram on the way?’

Matilal consented. ‘What’s your name?’ he asked.

‘Tarapada,’ said the boy.

The fair-skinned boy was beautiful to look at. His smile and his large
eyes had the grace of youth. His body – bare except for a stained dhoti –
was free of any excess: as if lovingly carved by a sculptor, or as if in a
previous life he had been a young sage whose pure religious devotion
had removed all grossness, honed him to gleaming, Brahminical
perfection.

‘Come and wash, bābā,’ said Matilal Babu tenderly. ‘You can eat with
us.’

‘Leave that to me,’ said Tarapada, and without a moment’s hesitation
he joined in the cooking. Matilal’s servant was Hindusthani: he was not
very good at cutting up fish.1 Tarapada took over, and soon had the dish
ready, and had cooked some vegetables too with practised skill. He then
took a dip in the river, and, opening his bundle, produced a clean white
garment and a small wooden comb. He sleeked his long hair away from
his forehead and down to his neck, adjusted his glistening sacred thread,
and stepped on to the boat.

Matilal Babu invited him into the cabin. His wife and his nine-year-old
daughter were there. His wife Annapurna was tenderly attracted to the
boy when she saw him, and wondered, ‘Whose child is he? Where has he
come from? How could his mother bear to abandon him?’ She placed
mats for Matilal and the boy to sit on, side by side. The boy was not a
big eater. Annapurna felt he must be shy, and tried to get him to eat this
or that; but when he had finished, he would not be tempted to more. He
clearly did everything according to his own wishes – but with such ease
that there was nothing assertive about him. He was not at all shy.

When everyone had eaten, Annapurna sat him next to her and asked
him about his background. She didn’t gather much. All she could
establish was that the boy had run away from home of his own volition
at the age of seven or eight.

‘Isn’t your mother alive?’ asked Annapurna.

‘She is,’ said Tarapada.

‘Doesn’t she love you?’ asked Annapurna.

Tarapada seemed to find this question peculiar. ‘Why shouldn’t she

love me?’ he said, laughing.

‘Then why did you leave her?’ said Annapurna.

‘She has four more sons and three daughters,’ said Tarapada.

Pained by this odd reply, Annapurna said, ‘What a thing to say! Just
because I have five fingers, does it mean that I want to chop one off?’

Tarapada was young, so his life-story was brief; but the boy was a
complete original. He was his parents’ fourth son, and was still a baby
when his father died. Despite there being so many in the house,
Tarapada was the darling of all; mother, brothers, sisters and neighbours
doted on him. So much so, that his tutor never beat him – everyone
would have been appalled if he had. There was no reason for him to
leave. Half-starved boys who constantly stole fruit from trees and were
thrashed by the owners of the trees – they never strayed from the village
or their scolding mothers! But this darling of everyone joined a touring
yātrā-troupe and left his village without a thought.

Search-parties went out and he was brought back. His mother pressed
him to her breast and drenched him with tears; his sisters wept too. His
elder brother tried to perform his duty as guardian; but he soon
abandoned his feeble attempts at discipline, and welcomed him back
with open arms. Women invited him to their houses, plied him with
even greater displays of affection. But he would not accept ties, even ties
of love: his stars had made him a wanderer. If he saw strange boats on
the river, or a sannyāsī from a distant region under the local peepul tree,
or if gypsies sat by the river, making mats or wicker baskets, his heart
would stir with longing to be free, to explore the outside world. And
after he had run away two or three times, family and villagers gave up
hope of him.

Again he joined a yātrā-troupe at first. But when the master of the
troupe began to treat him almost as a son, and the members of the
troupe, young and old, had all fallen for him – and even the people in
the houses where they performed (especially the women) began to make
a special fuss of him – one day, without saying a word, he disappeared,
and could not be found.

Tarapada was as wary of ties as a young fawn, and was also like a
deer in his love of music.1 The songs of the yātrā were what had first
lured him away from home. Melodies sent a trembling through his veins,
and rhythms made his body swing. Even as a baby he had shown such
solemn, grown-up attention at musical gatherings, sitting and swaying
and forgetting himself, that his elders could hardly restrain their
amusement. Not only music: when the rains of Śrābaṇ fell on the thick
leaves, when the clouds thundered, when the wind moaned in the woods
like a motherless demon-child, his heart was swept away. The call of a
kite high in the sky in the still heat of noon, the croaking of frogs on
rainy evenings, the howling of jackals at night, all entranced him.
Impelled by this passion for music, it was not long before he had joined
a group of p cāli-singers. The leader of the group carefully taught him
songs and trained him to recite p cāli by heart. He too began to love
him as his own. Like a pet cage-bird, Tarapada learnt a few songs, and
then one morning flew away.

Finally he joined a troupe of gymnasts. From Jyaistha to Āṣāṛh a fair
toured the district. Yātrā-troupes, p cāli-singers, bards, dancers and
stallholders travelled by boat from one site to another. For the second
year running this round of entertainment included a small gymnasticstroupe 
from Calcutta. At first Tarapada joined the stallholders – sold pān
at the fair. But then his natural curiosity drew him to the wonderful
skills of the gymnasts, and he joined their troupe. He had taught himself
to play the flute very well: during the gymnastic display he had to play
Lucknow thuṃris at top speed on the flute – this was his only task.

It was from this troupe that he had most recently absconded. He had
heard that the zamindars at Nandigram had founded, on a lavish scale,
an amateur yātrā-group, so he tied up his bundle and headed for the
place, meeting Matilal Babu on the way.

Despite these connections with various groups, his nature had not
been corrupted by any. He was, deep down, entirely detached and free.
The foul language he had heard, the dreadful sights he had seen, had not
fixed themselves in his mind. They passed him by. He remained
unbound by any kind of habit or custom. He swam in the murky waters
of the world with pure white wings, like a swan. However many times
his curiosity made him dive in, his wings could not be soaked or soiled.
There was a pure and natural innocence in this runaway boy’s
expression. So much so, that the worldly-wise Matilal Babu invited him
in without doubt or question, and with great tenderness.

II
In the afternoon the boat set sail. Annapurna continued to ask the boy
kind questions about his home and family; he answered laconically, and
then went out on deck to escape. The monsoon river, swollen to
maximum fullness, seemed to harry the earth with its reckless
turbulence. In the cloudless sunshine, the half-sunk reeds along the
bank, the fields of succulent sugar-cane beyond, and the far-off blueygreen 
woods kissing the horizon, seemed transformed by the touch of a
golden wand into new beauty. The speechless sky gazed down in
wonder: everything was alive, throbbing, awash with confident light,
shiny with newness, bursting with plenty.

Tarapada took refuge on the roof of the boat in the shade of the sail.
Sloping pastures, flooded jute-fields, green, rippling late-autumn paddy,
narrow paths leading from the ghāṭs, and villages shaded by encircling
foliage, came one by one into view. To this water, earth and sky, this
movement of life and sound, these varied levels and vast vistas, to this
huge, immovable, mute, unblinking, natural world, the boy was
intimately linked. Yet not for a moment did it try to hold him with its
loving embrace. Calves running on the banks with tails up-raised; ponies
grazing and hopping about with hobbled legs; kingfishers swooping from
fishing-net poles to plop into the water to catch fish; boys splashing;
women shrilly chatting as they stood chest-deep, floating their saris out
in front to rub them clean; fish-wives with baskets, saris tucked up,
buying fish from the fishermen: all of this Tarapada watched with
unflagging curiosity – never were his eyes sated.

As he sat, he soon got talking with the helmsman and oarsmen.
Sometimes he took the lagi and punted the boat himself. When the
helmsman needed a smoke, he would take the tiller; when the sail
needed to be turned, he helped skilfully.

Just before dusk Annapurna called Tarapada and asked, ‘What do you
like to eat at night?’

‘Whatever I get,’ said Tarapada. ‘I don’t eat every day.’

She felt disturbed by this beautiful Brahmin boy’s indifference to her
hospitality. She longed to feed, clothe and give succour to him. But she
could not discover how to please him. She ostentatiously sent her
servants to buy milk and sweets: Tarapada ate the sweets willingly
enough, but he would not touch the milk. Even the taciturn Matilal
urged him to drink it, but he simply replied, ‘I don’t like it.’

Three days passed. Tarapada expertly joined in everything, from the
cooking and shopping to the sailing of the boat. Anything he saw
interested him; any work that he did absorbed him. His sight, his hands
and his mind were ever-active: like Nature herself he was always serene
and detached, yet always busy. People usually dwell in a fixed place, but
Tarapada was like a joyous wave on life’s unending stream: past or
future meant nothing – moving forward was the only thing that
mattered.

By mixing with various groups, he had learnt all sorts of delightful
accomplishments. Things were stamped on his mind with astonishing
ease, unclouded as it was by any kind of worry. He knew p cāli, folktales, 
kīrtan, and long pieces from yātrās. Matilal Babu habitually read
the Rāmāyaṇa to his wife and daughter. One evening he had just got to
the story of Kush and Lab when Tarapada, unable to restrain himself,
came down from the roof of the boat and said, ‘Put the book away. I
know a song about Kush and Lab – listen!’

He began a p cāli. Dashu Ray’s verse, sweet as a flute, flowed on
swiftly; the helmsman and oarsmen came and peered through the door
of the cabin; as dusk fell, a stream of laughter, pathos and music spread
through the evening air: the banks became alert, and people in passing
boats were lured for a moment and strained their ears to listen. When
the p cāli had finished, everyone sighed deeply, wishing it would last
forever. The tearful Annapurna longed to take the boy and press him to
her breast and bury her face in his hair. Matilal Babu thought, ‘If I could
somehow keep this boy, he would make up for my having no son.’ The
little girl Charushashi, though, was full of envy and jealousy.

III
She was her parents’ only child, sole claimant on their affection. There
was no end to her wilfulness and obstinacy. She had her own opinions
about food, clothes and hair-styles, but there was no consistency in
them. Whenever she was invited out, her mother was terrified that she
would make impossible demands over dress. If her hair-style displeased
her, to do and redo it made no difference, and merely led to a tantrum.
She was like this with everything. But if she was in a good mood, she
was amenable to anything – and would show excessive love for her
mother, hugging her, kissing her, laughing in an unbalanced way. The
girl was a puzzle.

But now her volatile feelings began to concentrate in fierce animosity
towards Tarapada, and she caused exceptional trouble to her parents. At
meals she scowled and pushed her plate away: she would complain
about the cooking, slap the maid, and object to everything. The more
that Tarapada’s accomplishments impressed her and others, the more
angry she became. She would not admit that he had any virtues at all;
undeniable evidence of them made her even more critical. On the night
that Tarapada sang about Kush and Lab, Annapurna thought, ‘Wild
animals can be tamed by music, so perhaps my daughter will soften.’

‘How did you like it, Charu?’ she asked. She gave no answer, merely
tossed her head, implying: ‘I didn’t like it at all and shall never like it.’

Realizing that Charu was jealous, her mother stopped showing
affection for Tarapada in front of her. After dark, when Charu had gone
to bed after eating early, Annapurna would sit by the door of the cabin
and Matilal Babu and Tarapada would sit outside, and at Annapurna’s
request Tarapada would sing. With his singing, the goddess of the
sleeping, darkened homes on the bank would sink into a trance, and
Annapurna’s heart swelled with love and appreciation. But Charu would
get up and shout tearfully and angrily, ‘Mother, I can’t get to sleep with
this noise!’ She found it quite unbearable to be sent to bed on her own
while her parents sat and listened to Tarapada singing.

The natural fierceness of this fiery black-eyed girl fascinated
Tarapada. He would tell her stories, sing her songs, play her the flute,
make great efforts to win her round – but with no success at all. Only in
the afternoons when he bathed in the swollen river, sporting his fair,
pure body in a swimming display worthy of a young water-god – only
then could she not help being attracted just a little bit. She would watch
him then. But she didn’t reveal her interest to anyone, and – born actress
that she was – carried on knitting a woollen scarf with apparent
indifference to Tarapada’s water-sports.

IV
Tarapada took no notice of Nandigram when they passed it. The large
boat – sometimes with its sails up, sometimes towed – proceeded slowly
on down rivers and tributaries, and the days of the passengers too
flowed with a soft and easy pace through the peace and beauty of the
scene. No one was in any kind of hurry; long afternoons were spent
bathing and eating; and as soon as dusk fell the boat was moored at a
village ghāṭ, by trees buzzing with crickets and aglow with fireflies.

After about ten days of this the boat arrived at Kathaliya. Ponies and a
palanquin were sent from the house to receive the zamindar; a guard of
honour (with bamboo lāṭhis) fired rounds of blanks – raucously echoed
by the village crows.

Meanwhile Tarapada slipped off the boat and quickly looked round
the village. Calling one villager Dādā, another Khuṛā, another Didi, and
another Māsī, he established friendly relations with everyone in a couple
of hours. Because he had no normal ties, he could get to know people
with amazing ease and speed. Within a few days he had won all hearts.

He mixed with everyone on equal terms. He was unconventional, yet
able to adapt to any situation or work. With boys he was a boy, yet
somehow separate and special; with older people he was not a boy, yet
not too precocious either; with herders he was a herder, yet also a
Brahmin. He joined in with things as if used to them all his life. He’d be
chatting in the sweet-shop: the sweet-maker would say, ‘Could you mind
the shop for a while? I shan’t be long.’ Cool as a cucumber, Tarapada sat
there keeping the flies off the sandeś with a śāl-leaf. He could even make
sweets himself, knew something of weaving, and was not completely
ignorant of how to turn a potter’s wheel.

Tarapada reigned over the whole village; there was just one young girl
whose hatred he simply could not overcome. Perhaps it was because this
girl so fiercely wished him to leave that he stayed on so long. But
Charushashi now proved how hard it is to fathom even a juvenile female
mind.

Bāmunṭhākrun’s1 daughter Sonamani had been widowed at the age of
five; she was Charu’s playmate. She had been ill for a while, and had not
been able to go out to see her friend. When she was recovered and came
to see her again, a rift between them came about for almost no reason.

Charu had been speaking at length about Tarapada: she hoped, by
saying what a precious asset he was, to astonish and intrigue her friend.
But when she discovered he was known to Sonamani, that he called
Bāmunthākrun Māsī and that Sonamani called him Dādā; when she
heard that he not only treated mother and daughter to kīrtan-tunes on
his flute but had, at Sonamani’s request, made her a bamboo flute; that
he’d picked her fruits from high branches and flowers from thorny ones;
when she heard all this, darts of fire stabbed her. She had thought of
Tarapada as their Tarapada – guarded closely, so that ordinary people
might glimpse him yet never be able to grasp him: they would admire
his beauty and talents from a distance, and Charushashi’s family would
gain glory thereby. Why should Sonamani have such easy contact with
this singular, divinely favoured Brahmin boy? If Charu’s family had not
taken him in, had not looked after him so, how would Sonamani ever
have seen him? Sonamani’s Dādā indeed! She burned all over at the
thought.

Why was the Charu who had tried to strike the boy down with arrows
of hatred so anxious to claim sole rights over him? Understand this who
will.

Later that day Charu had a serious rift with Sonamani over another
trivial matter. She marched into Tarapada’s room, found his beloved
flute, and callously jumped and stamped on it. She was still doing so
when Tarapada came in. He was amazed by the image of destruction
that the girl presented.

‘Charu, why are you smashing my flute?’ he asked.

‘I want to smash it! I’m going to smash it!’ shouted Charu with red eyes
and flushed face; and, stamping unnecessarily on the already smashed
flute, she burst into loud sobs and ran from the room. Tarapada picked
up the pieces, turned them this way and that, but it was useless. To
wreak destruction on his old, innocent flute was so absurd that he burst
out laughing. Charushashi intrigued him more every day.

He was also intrigued by the English illustrated books in Matilal
Babu’s library. Tarapada had considerable knowledge of the world, but
he could not enter the world of these pictures at all. He tried to do so in
his imagination, but found no satisfaction in this. Seeing his interest in
these books, Matilal said one day, ‘Would you like to learn English?
You’ll understand these pictures then.’

‘I would like to learn it,’ he replied at once.

Matilal Babu happily engaged the headmaster of the village secondary
school – Ramratan Babu – to teach the boy English each evening.

V
Tarapada set about learning English with great concentration and
retention. It released him into a hitherto inaccessible realm, unconnected
with his former world. The local people saw no more of him; at dusk,
when he went to the empty riverside to pace swiftly up and down
reciting his lessons, his boyish devotees mournfully watched from a
distance; they dared not disturb his studies.

Charu too did not see much of him now. Formerly Tarapada ate in the
women’s quarters, under Annapurna’s loving gaze; but because this
could take a long time he asked Matilal Babu to arrange for him to eat
outside them. Annapurna was hurt by this and objected, but Matilal was
so pleased by Tarapada’s keenness to learn that he agreed to the new
arrangement.

Charu now insisted that she too wanted to learn English. At first her
parents were amused by their wayward daughter’s new idea, lovingly
laughed at it; but its absurdity was soon washed away by tears. Doting
parents that they were, they were forced to give in, and she started to
study alongside Tarapada with the same tutor.

Study, however, was alien to her restless nature. She learned nothing
herself – merely disrupted Tarapada’s learning. She fell far behind,
couldn’t learn anything by heart, but couldn’t bear to be behind! If
Tarapada overtook her and moved on to a new lesson, she was furious
and burst into tears. When he finished an old book and bought a new
one, she had to buy the new book too. In his spare time he would sit in
his room learning and writing his lessons: the jealous girl couldn’t stand
this – she would secretly come and pour ink on his exercise-book, steal
his pen, even tear from the book the passage he had been set to learn.
Tarapada bore most of this with amusement: if she went too far he
slapped her, but he was quite unable to control her.

A chance occurrence saved him. One day, truly annoyed, he tore up
his ink-spilled exercise-book and sat gloomily. Charu came to the door,
and prepared herself for a beating. But nothing happened: Tarapada
went on sitting in silence. The girl went in and out of the room. Several
times she came so close that Tarapada could, if he had wished, easily
have thwacked her on the back. But he did not do that, and remained
solemn. The girl was in a quandary. How to ask for forgiveness was
something she had never learnt; yet she was extremely anxious for
forgiveness. Finally, seeing no other way, she took a piece of the torn
exercise-book, sat down next to Tarapada and wrote in large round
letters, ‘I will never pour ink on your exercise-book again.’ She then
made elaborate efforts to attract his attention. At this Tarapada could
not contain himself any more, and he burst out laughing. The girl dashed
from the room, overcome with shame and anger. Only if she had been
able to expunge from all time the paper on which she had humbled
herself, would her fury have been eased.

During this period Sonamani had once or twice, with her heart in her
mouth, lurked outside the lesson-room. She was close to her friend
Charushashi in most matters, but with regard to Tarapada she feared and
distrusted her. At moments when Charu was in the women’s quarters,
she would stand timidly outside Tarapada’s door. He would look up from
his book and say tenderly, ‘What is it, Sona, what’s up? How is Māsī?’
Sonamani would say, ‘You haven’t been to see us for a long time –
Mother wishes you would sometime. She has backache, so she can’t
come to you.’

Charu would perhaps now appear. Sonamani was flustered: she felt
like a thief. Charu would scowl and shriek at her, ‘Well, Sona – coming
to disturb our studies! I’ll tell my father!’ As if she herself was
Tarapada’s guardian, whose sole object was to watch him day and night
in case his studies were disturbed! But God was not unaware of what her
actual motive was in coming to Tarapada’s room at this odd time, and
Tarapada also knew it well. Poor Sonamani fumbled for false
explanations; when Charu venomously called her a liar she withdrew,
sick at heart, defeated. The kindly Tarapada would call her and say,
‘Sona, I’ll come to your house this evening.’ Charu hissed back like a
snake, ‘How can you go? What about your lessons? I’ll tell Māṣṭārmaśāy!’

Undaunted by Charu’s threat, Tarapada spent a couple of evenings at
Bāmunthākrun’s house. On the third day Charu, without further
warning, quietly bolted his door; and, fetching the padlock from her
mother’s spice-box, locked him in. She kept him prisoner for the whole
evening, only opening the door when it was time to eat. Tarapada was
angrily silent, and was about to go out without eating. Then the
passionate, overwrought girl clasped her hands and cried out repeatedly,
‘I promise you – cross my heart – that I won’t do it again. Please, I beg
you, eat before you go!’ When even this had no effect she began to wail,
and he was forced to turn back and eat.

Charu many times promised herself that she would behave properly
towards Tarapada, that she would not annoy him again; but when
Sonamani and others turned up it put her into such a rage that she could
not control herself. If she was good for a few days, Tarapada would steel
himself for another tempest. No one could say how the attack would
come or on what grounds. There would be a mighty storm, and floods of
tears to follow, and after that peace and affection again.

VI
Almost two years passed like this. Tarapada had never moored himself to
anyone for so long. Maybe his studies had a hold on him; or maybe he
was changing as he grew up, and a stable existence in a comfortable
house had more appeal than before. Maybe the beauty of his studycompanion – even if she had been constantly bad-tempered – was
exerting unconscious influence.

Meanwhile Charu had reached the age of eleven. Matilal Babu had
sought out two or three good marriage-offers. Now that she had reached
marriageable age, he placed a ban on English books and outside visits.
She kicked up a terrible fuss at these new restrictions.

Then one day Annapurna called Matilal and said, ‘Why search outside
for a groom? Tarapada would make a fine husband. And your daughter
likes him.’

Matilal Babu was astonished at this suggestion. ‘That’s impossible,’ he
said. ‘We don’t know anything about his family. She’s my only daughter:
I want to marry her well.’

Some people came from the zamindar’s house at Raydanga to look at
the girl. Efforts were made to dress Charu up: she shut herself in her
room and refused to come out. Matilal Babu begged and rebuked her
from outside, but without result. Finally he had to lie to the delegation
from Raydanga: his daughter had suddenly fallen ill, and could not be
seen today. They assumed from this lame excuse that the girl had some
kind of defect.

Matilal Babu started to reflect that Tarapada was indeed good to look
at, good in every outward aspect; he could keep him at home, so his only
daughter would not have to go to someone else’s house. He realized that
his truculent daughter’s foibles, which he and his wife could smile at,
would not be received so well by in-laws.

After lengthy discussion, Matilal and Annapurna sent a man to
Tarapada’s village to find out about his family. The information came
that it was poor, but high-caste. Matilal Babu then sent a marriageproposal 
to the boy’s mother and brothers. They were well-pleased, and
agreed to it at once.

Back at Kathaliya, Matilal and Annapurna discussed the day and hour
of the wedding, but the naturally cautious Matilal kept the whole matter
secret.

Charu, though, could not be restricted. She sometimes burst into
Tarapada’s room like a cavalry-charge, disturbing his studies with
crossness, eagerness or scorn. Sometimes, detached and independent
though he was, he felt a strange stirring in his heart at this, a sort of
electrical impulse. Till now he had floated lightly and serenely without
impediment on Time’s stream: sometimes now he was snared by strange
distracting day-dreams. He would leave his studies and go into Matilal
Babu’s library and flick through the pages of the illustrated books; the
imaginary world which he mixed with these pictures was much changed
– much more highly-coloured than before. He could not laugh at Charu’s
strange behaviour quite as he had done in the past. When she was bad
he never thought of beating her now. This deep change, this powerful
feeling of attraction, was like a new dream.

Matilal Babu fixed the wedding for the month of Śrābaṇ, and sent
word to Tarapada’s mother and brothers; but he did not inform Tarapada
himself. He told his moktār in Calcutta to hire a trumpet-and-drum band,
and he ordered everything else that would be needed for the wedding.

Early monsoon clouds formed in the sky. The village-river had been
dried up for weeks; there was water only in holes here and there; small
boats lay stuck in these pools of muddy water, and the dry river-bed was
rutted with bullock-cart tracks. But now, like Parvati returning to her
parents’ home, gurgling waters returned to the empty arms of the
village: naked children danced and shouted on the river-bank, jumped
into the water with voracious joy as if trying to embrace the river; the
villagers gazed at the river like a dear friend; a huge wave of life and
delight rolled through the parched village. There were boats big and
small with cargoes from far and wide; in the evenings the ghāṭ resounded
with the songs of foreign boatmen. The villages along the river had spent

the whole year confined to their own small worlds: now, with the rains,
the vast outside world had come in its earth-coloured watery chariot,
carrying wondrous gifts to the villages, as if on a visit to its daughters.
Rustic smallness was temporarily subsumed by pride of contact with the
world; everything became more active; the bustle of distant cities came
to this sleepy region, and the whole sky rang.

Meanwhile at Kurulkata, on the Nag family estate, a famous chariotfestival 
was due to be held. One moonlit evening Tarapada went to the
ghāt and saw, on the swift flood-tide, boats with merry-go-rounds and
yātrā-troupes, and cargo-boats rapidly making for the fair. An orchestra
from Calcutta was practising loudly as it passed; the yātrā-troupe was
singing to violin accompaniment, shouting out the beats; boatmen from
lands to the west split the sky with cymbals and thudding drums. Such
excitement! Then clouds from the east covered the moon with their huge
black sails; an east wind blew sharply; cloud after cloud rolled by; the
river gushed and swelled; darkness thickened in the swaying riverside
trees; frogs croaked; crickets rasped like wood-saws. To Tarapada the
whole world seemed like a chariot-festival: wheels turning, flags flying,
earth trembling, clouds swirling, wind rushing, river flowing, boats
sailing, songs rising! There were rumbles of thunder, and slashes of
lightning in the sky: the smell of torrential rain approached from the
dark distance. But Kathaliya village next to the river ignored all this: she
shut her doors, turned out her lamps and went to sleep.

The following morning Tarapada’s mother and brothers arrived at
Kathaliya; and that same morning three large boats from Calcutta, laden
with things for the wedding, moored at the zamindar’s ghāt; and very
early, that same morning, Sonamani brought some mango-juice
preserve1 in paper and some pickle wrapped in a leaf, and timidly stood
outside Tarapada’s room – but Tarapada was not to be seen. In a cloudy
monsoon night, before love and emotional ties could encircle him
completely, this Brahmin boy, thief of all hearts in the village, had
returned to the unconstraining, unemotional arms of his mother Earth.

