Phatik Chakrabarti, leader of the gang, suddenly had a bright idea. Lying
by the river was a huge sāl-tree log, just waiting to be made into a mast.
Everyone must help to roll it along! Without giving a thought to the
surprise, annoyance and inconvenience that would be caused to the
person who needed the log for timber, all the boys fell in with this
suggestion. They got down to the task with a will; but just then Phatik’s
younger brother Makhanlal came and solemnly sat on the log. The boys
were rather nonplussed by his haughty, dismissive attitude.

One of them went up to him and nervously tried to push him off, but
he refused to budge. Wise beyond his years, he continued to ponder the
vanity of all childish games.

‘You’ll pay for this,’ said Phatik, brandishing his fist. ‘Clear off.’

But Makhanlal merely adjusted his perch and settled down even more
immovably on the log.

In this kind of situation, Phatik ought to have preserved his
supremacy over the other boys by delivering immediately a hearty slap
on his wayward brother’s cheek – but he didn’t dare. Instead he assumed
a manner implying that he could, had he so wished, have meted out this
customary punishment, but he wasn’t going to, because a more amusing
idea had occurred to him. Why not, he proposed, roll the log over with
Makhanlal on it?

Makhan at first saw glory in this; he did not think (nor did anyone
else) that like other worldly glories it might carry dangers. The boys
rolled up their sleeves and began to push – ‘Heave ho! Heave ho! Over
we go!’ With one spin of the log, Makhan’s solemnity, glory and wisdom
crashed to the ground.

The other boys were delighted at such an unexpectedly quick
outcome, but Phatik was rather embarrassed. Makhan immediately
jumped up and threw himself on to him, hitting him with blind rage and
scratching his nose and cheeks. Then he made his way home tearfully.

The game having been spoilt, Phatik pulled up a few reeds, and
climbing on to the prow of a half-sunk boat sat quietly chewing them. A
boat – not a local one – came up to the mooring-place. A middle-aged
gentleman with a black moustache but grey hair stepped ashore. ‘Where
is the Chakrabartis’ house?’ he asked the boy.

‘Over there,’ replied Phatik, still chewing the reed-stalks. But no one
would have been able to understand which direction to take.

‘Where?’ asked the gentleman again.

‘Don’t know,’ said Phatik, and he carried on as before, sucking juice
from the stalks. The gentleman had to ask others to help him find the
house.

Suddenly Bagha Bagdi (a servant) appeared and said, ‘Phatikdādā,
Mother’s calling you.’

‘Shan’t go,’ said Phatik.

He struggled and kicked helplessly as Bagha picked him up bodily and
carried him home. His mother shouted furiously when she saw him:

‘You’ve beaten up Makhan again!’

‘I didn’t beat him up.’

‘How dare you lie to me?’

‘I did not beat him up. Ask him.’

When Makhan was questioned he stuck to his earlier accusation,
saying, ‘He did beat me up.’ Phatik could not stand this any more. He
charged at Makhan and thumped him hard, shouting, ‘So who’s lying
now?’ His mother, taking Makhan’s part, rushed and slapped Phatik’s
back several times heavily. He pushed her away. ‘So you’d lay hands on
your own mother?’ she screamed.

At that moment the black-grey gentleman entered the house and said,
‘What’s going on here?’

‘Dādā!’ said Phatik’s mother, overwhelmed with surprise and joy.
‘When did you come?’ She bent down and took the dust of his feet.

Many years previously her elder brother had gone to the west of India
to work, and in the meantime she had had two children; they had
grown, her husband had died – but all this time she had never seen her
brother. At long last Bishvambhar Babu had returned home, and had
now come to see his sister.

There were celebrations for several days. At length, a couple of days
before his departure, Bishvambhar questioned his sister about the
schooling and progress of her two sons. In reply, he was given a
description of Phatik’s uncontrollable wildness and inattention to study;
while Makhan, by contrast, was perfectly behaved and a model student.
‘Phatik drives me mad,’ she said.

Bishvambhar then proposed that he take Phatik to Calcutta, keep him
with him and supervise his education. The widow easily agreed to this.
‘Well, Phatik,’ he asked the boy, ‘how would you like to go to Calcutta
with your uncle?’ ‘I’d love to,’ said Phatik, jumping up and down.

His mother did not object to seeing her son off, because she always
lived in dread that Makhan might be pushed into the river by him or
might split his head open in some terrible accident; but she was a little
cast down by the eagerness with which Phatik seized the idea of going.
He pestered his uncle with ‘When are we going? When are we going?’ –
and couldn’t sleep at night for excitement.

When at last the day to leave came, he was moved to a joyous display
of generosity. He bestowed on Makhan his fishing-rod, kite and reel,
with permanent right of inheritance.

When he arrived at his uncle’s house in Calcutta, he first had to be
introduced to his aunt. I cannot say she was over-pleased at this
unnecessary addition to her family. She was used to looking after her
house and three children as they were, and suddenly to loose into their
midst an unknown, uneducated country boy would probably be most
disruptive. If only Bishvambhar had insight commensurate with his
years! Moreover, there is no greater nuisance in the world than a boy of
thirteen or fourteen. There is no beauty in him, and he does nothing
useful either. He arouses no affection; nor is his company welcome. If he
speaks modestly he sounds false; if he speaks sense he sounds arrogant;
if he speaks at all he is felt to be intrusive. He suddenly shoots up in
height so that his clothes no longer fit him – which is an ugly affront to
other people. His childish grace and sweetness of voice suddenly
disappear, and people find it impossible not to blame him for this. Many
faults can be forgiven in a child or a young man, but at this age even
natural and unavoidable faults are felt to be unbearable.

He himself is fully aware that he does not fit properly into the world;
so he is perpetually ashamed of his existence and seeks forgiveness for it.
Yet this is the age at which a rather greater longing for affection
develops in him. If he gets at this time love and companionship from
some sympathetic person, he will do anything in return. But no one
dares show affection, in case others condemn this as pampering. So he
looks and behaves like a stray street-dog.

To leave home and mother and go to a strange place is hell for a boy
of this age. To live with loveless indifference all around is like walking
on thorns. This is the age when normally a conception forms of women
as wonderful, heavenly creatures; to be cold-shouldered by them is
terribly hard to bear. It was therefore especially painful to Phatik that
his aunt saw him as an evil star. If she happened to ask him to do a job
for her and – meaning well – he did more than was strictly necessary, his
aunt would stamp on his enthusiasm, saying, ‘That’s quite enough, quite
enough. I don’t want you meddling any more. Go and get on with your
own work. Do some studying.’ His aunt’s excessive concern for his
mental improvement would then seem terribly cruel and unjust.

He so lacked love in this household, and it seemed he could breathe
freely nowhere. Stuck behind its walls, he thought constantly of his
home village. The fields where he would let his ‘monster-kite’ fly and
flap in the wind; the river-bank where he wandered aimlessly, singing a
rāga of his own invention at the top of his voice; the small stream in
which he would jump and swim now and then in the heat of the day; his
gang of followers; the mischief they would get up to; the freedom; above
all his harsh, impetuous mother; all this tugged continually at his
helpless heart. A kind of instinctive love, like an animal’s; a blind
longing to be near; an unspoken distress at being far; a heartfelt,
anguished cry of ‘Mā, Mā’ like a motherless calf at dusk; such feelings
perpetually afflicted this gawky, nervous, thin, lanky, ungainly boy.

At school there was no one more stupid and inattentive than he. If
asked a question he would just stare back vacantly. If the teacher cuffed
him, he would silently bear it like a laden, exhausted ass. At break-time,
he would stand at the window staring at the roofs of distant houses,
while his classmates played outside. If a child or two appeared for a
moment on one of the roofs, in the midday sunshine, playing some
game, his misery intensified.

One day he plucked up courage to ask his uncle, ‘Uncle, when will I
be going home to see Mother?’

‘When the school holiday comes,’ said his uncle. The pūjā-holiday in
the month of Kartik – that was a long way off!

One day Phatik lost his school-books. He never found it easy to
prepare his lessons, and now, with his books lost, he was completely
helpless. The teacher started to beat and humiliate him every day. His
standing in school sank so low that his cousins were ashamed to admit
their connection with him. Whenever he was punished, they showed
even greater glee than the other boys. It became too much to bear, and
one day he went to his aunt and confessed like a criminal that he had
lost his school-books. ‘Well, well,’ said his aunt, lines of annoyance
curling round her lips, ‘and do you suppose I can buy you new books
five times a month?’ He said no more. That he should have wasted
someone else’s money made him feel even more hurt and rejected by his
mother. His misery and sense of inferiority dragged him down to the
very earth.

That night, when he returned from school, he had a pain in his head
and was shivering. He could tell he was getting a fever. He also knew
that his aunt would not take kindly to his being ill. He had a clear sense
of what an unnecessary, unjustifiable nuisance it would be to her. He felt
he had no right to expect that an odd, useless, stupid boy such as he
should be nursed by anyone other than his mother.

The next morning Phatik was nowhere to be seen. He was searched
for in all the neighbours’ houses round about, but there was no trace of
him. In the evening torrential rain began, so in searching for him many
people got soaked to the skin – to no avail. In the end, finding him
nowhere, Bishvambhar Babu informed the police.

A whole day later, in the evening, a carriage drew up outside
Bishvambhar’s house. Rain was still thudding down relentlessly, and the
street was flooded to a knee’s depth. Two policemen bundled Phatik out
of the carriage and put him down in front of Bishvambhar. He was
soaked from head to foot, covered with mud, his eyes and cheeks were
flushed, he was trembling violently. Bishvambhar virtually had to carry
him into the house.

‘You see what happens,’ snapped his wife, ‘when you take in someone
else’s child. You must send him home.’ But in fact the whole of that day
she had hardly been able to eat for worry, and had been unreasonably
tetchy with her own children.

‘I was going to go to my mother,’ said Phatik, weeping, ‘but they
brought me back.’

The boy’s fever climbed alarmingly. He was delirious all night.
Bishvambhar fetched the doctor. Opening his bloodshot eyes for a
moment and staring blankly at the ceiling joists, Phatik said, ‘Uncle, has
my holiday-time come?’ Bishvambhar, dabbing his own eyes with a
handkerchief, tenderly took Phatik’s thin, hot hand in his and sat down
beside him. He spoke again, mumbling incoherently: ‘Mother, don’t beat
me, Mother. I didn’t do anything wrong, honest!’

The next day, during the short time when he was conscious, Phatik
kept looking bewilderedly round the room, as if expecting someone.
When no one came, he turned and lay mutely with his face towards the
wall. Understanding what was on his mind, Bishvambhar bent down and
said softly in his ear, ‘Phatik, I’ve sent for your mother.’

Another day passed. The doctor, looking solemn and gloomy,
pronounced the boy’s condition to be critical. Bishvambhar sat at the
bedside in the dim lamplight, waiting minute by minute for Phatik’s
mother’s arrival. Phatik started to shout out, like a boatman, ‘More than
one fathom deep, more than two fathoms deep!’ To come to Calcutta
they had had to travel some of the way by steamer. The boatmen had
lowered the hawser into the stream and bellowed out its depth. In his
delirium, Phatik was imitating them, calling out the depth in pathetic
tones; except that the endless sea he was about to cross had no bottom
that his measuring-rope could touch.

It was then that his mother stormed into the room, bursting into loud
wails of grief. When, with difficulty, Bishvambhar managed to calm her
down, she threw herself on to the bed and sobbed, ‘Phatik, my darling,
my treasure.’

‘Yes?’ said Phatik, seemingly quite relaxed.

‘Phatik, darling boy,’ cried his mother again.

Turning slowly on to his side, and looking at no one, Phatik said
softly, ‘Mother, my holiday has come now. I’m going home.’

