‘Doctor! Doctor!’

Someone pestering me! In the middle of the night! I opened my eyes
to see our local zamindar, Dakshinacharan Babu. I scrambled to my feet,
dragged out my broken-backed armchair for him, sat him down, and
looked anxiously into his face. It was half past two by my watch.

His face was pale and his eyes were staring as he spoke: ‘The same
trouble again tonight – your medicine hasn’t worked.’

‘Perhaps you’ve been drinking again,’ I said, hesitantly.

He flared up. ‘You’re quite wrong there – it isn’t drink. Unless I tell
you the whole story from beginning to end, you’ll never know the
reason.’

The small tin kerosene lamp on the shelf was guttering, and I raised
the wick. It shone a little more brightly and made lots of smoke. I tucked
up my dhoti and sat cross-legged on a packing-case covered with
newspaper. Dakshinacharan Babu began.

‘You don’t find many housewives like my first wife. But I was young
then, and susceptible, and always immersed in poetry, so undiluted
housewifery didn’t appeal to me much. Those lines of Kalidasa kept
coming to me:

A wife is a counsellor, friend and lover;
In the fine arts, it’s a joy to teach her.

But I didn’t get much joy in my efforts to teach my wife, and if I tried to
address her in terms of a lover she would burst out laughing. Like Indra’s
elephant floundering in the Ganges, the finest gems of poetry and
fondest endearments were swept away instantly by her laughter. She was
marvellously good at laughing.

‘Four years went by, and then I fell terribly ill. I had boils on my lips; I
was delirious with fever; I was fighting for my life. No one thought I
would survive. Things got so far, that the doctor gave me up for lost. But
then a relative of mine brought a monk from somewhere: he gave me a
root mixed with ghee – and, whether through the power of this medicine
or through Fate, I recovered.

‘While I was ill my wife didn’t rest for a minute. Death’s envoys
gathered at the door for those few days, and a feeble woman fought
them continuously with mere human strength and the utmost power of
feeling. She seemed to clutch and press my unworthy life to her breast as
if it were her child, giving all her love and care. She didn’t eat, or sleep;
she had no thought for anything else in the world.

‘Like a vanquished tiger, Death dropped me from its jaws and went
away; but as he went, he dealt my wife a heavy blow with his paw. She
was pregnant at the time, and after a short time gave birth to a dead
baby. Various complicated illnesses began after that. I had to look after
her. This used to embarrass her. “What are you doing?” she would say.
“What will people think? Don’t keep coming in and out of my room like
this all the time!”

‘At night, when she was feverish, if I tried to fan her by pretending I
was fanning myself, a tug-of-war for the fan would ensue. If sometimes
my nursing took me ten minutes past my meal-time, I had to beg and
coax her to accept it. The slightest attention seemed to do more harm
than good. She would say, “It’s not right for a man to do all this.”

‘I dare say you’ve seen our house at Baranagar. There’s a garden in
front, between the house and the Ganges. On the south side of the house,
just beneath our bedroom, my wife enclosed a small plot with a henna
hedge and made a garden of her own. Out of all the garden, that plot
was the most unostentatious and natural. That is to say, colour did not
take precedence over scent, or botanical variety over blooms; and there
were no tags with Latin names next to nondescript plants in tubs.
Instead, there were roses, jasmine, gardenia, oleander and tuberose in
wild abundance. A seat of white marble had been made round the base
of a huge bakul tree. Before her illness, my wife herself stood at it twice
a day, scrubbing it clean. On summer evenings, when her housework
was finished, she sat there. She could watch the Ganges, but Babus, in
company-yachts, could not see her.

‘After many days of being confined to bed, she suddenly said one
moonlit Caitra evening, “I’m sick of being shut up indoors; today I shall
go and sit in my garden for a while.”

‘I slowly and gingerly guided her to the stone seat under the bakul
tree, and laid her down there. I would have been quite happy to have
her head resting on my knee, but I knew she would find this odd; so I
brought a pillow for her instead.

‘Full-blown bakul-flowers floated down in ones and twos, and
shadowy moonlight shone through gaps in the branches on to her wasted
face. It was still and peaceful all around; and as I sat beside her in the
fragrant shadows and looked at her face, tears came to my eyes.

‘I slowly edged towards her and took her hot, emaciated hand in
mine. She made no objection. After sitting in silence like this for a while,
my heart swelled and I burst out, “I shall never forget your love!” At
once I realized I should not have said that. My wife laughed. In that
laugh there was modesty, pleasure, and some disbelief; but also a
considerable dose of the keenest mockery. She offered not a word of
argument, but her laughter said, “You’ll never forget? That’s impossible
and I don’t expect it either.”

‘For fear of this sweet piercing laugh, I never dared use amorous
words with my wife. Whatever came to my mind when I was alone
seemed utterly stupid if I tried to come out with it to her face. To this
day, I cannot understand why words which, when I saw them in print,
made my eyes stream with tears, seemed so ludicrous when spoken.

‘Arguments deal in words, but you cannot argue with a laugh; so all I
could do was stay silent. The moonlight grew brighter; a koel-bird was
calling more and more impatiently. I sat and wondered if, even on a
moonlit night like this, the female koel-bird was deaf.

‘Despite every medical effort my wife’s illnesses showed no sign of
recovery. The doctor said, “Why not try a change of air?” I took her to
Allahabad.’

Dakshinacharan Babu suddenly stopped at this point. He eyed me
suspiciously, and then sat thinking with his head in his hands. I also kept
silent. The kerosene lamp on the shelf was dim now, and the whining of
the mosquitoes could be heard clearly in the still room. Suddenly he
broke his silence and began again: ‘At Allahabad my wife was treated by
Dr Haran. He spent a long time treating her, but finally he too said what
I and my wife already knew: that her condition could not be cured. She
would be ill for the rest of her life.

‘One day she said to me, “I shan’t get better and neither can I hope for
a speedy death. Why should you spend your life with a living corpse?
You should marry again.”

‘She saw this as a logical and rational solution: she had not the
slightest sense of anything great or heroic or peculiar in it. Now it was
my turn to laugh – had I had any of her talent for laughter. Like the hero
of a novel, I gravely and pompously started: “For as long as there is life
in my body –”

‘ “Come, come,” she interrupted. “Don’t go on! Hearing you talk like
that is enough to kill me!”

‘ “I shall not be able to love anyone else –” I continued, refusing to
give in. My wife laughed loudly at this, so I had to stop.

‘I don’t know if I ever admitted it to myself at the time, but I can now
see I was wearying of all this nursing with no hope of recovery. I never
imagined I would back out of it; but I was dismayed by the prospect of
spending my whole life with an incurable patient. When as a young man
I had looked ahead, my whole future seemed packed with the magic of
love, the lure of pleasure, the charm of beauty. But that was all a mirage
now, and a hopeless, barren desert stretched out in front of me.

‘My wife must have perceived this inner tiredness in my nursing of
her. I did not know it at the time, but I am sure she could read me as
easily as the unjoined letters of a child’s first reader. So when I cast
myself in the role of a romantic hero, and solemnly mouthed my
poeticisms, she laughed with affection, but also with helpless merriment.
I still want to die with shame when I think of her godlike insight into my
innermost thoughts.

‘Dr Haran was of the same caste as ourselves. I was often invited to his
house. After a few days of going there, he introduced me to his daughter.
The girl was unmarried; she was about fifteen. The doctor told me she
was not yet married because he had not found a groom to his liking. But
from others I heard a rumour of some kind of scandal in the family. She
could not, though, be faulted in any other respect. She was as
accomplished as she was beautiful. We talked of many things, and
sometimes I returned home late – past the time for my wife’s dose of
medicine. She knew I had gone to Dr Haran’s house, but never asked the
reason for my lateness.

‘I began to see a new mirage in the desert. Bursting with thirst, I saw
clear, overflowing water lapping and purling before me. However hard I
tried, I could not turn my mind from it, and my wife’s sick-room became
doubly unattractive to me. My nursing and doses of medicine began to
fail in their regularity.

‘Dr Haran said to me sometimes that death was best for those whose
illnesses could not be cured, because they could take no pleasure in
being alive and were a misery to others. General statements like this are
permissible: he should not, however, have said such a thing with
reference to my wife. But doctors become so indifferent to human
mortality that they don’t always understand people’s feelings.

‘Suddenly one day I heard my wife saying in the next room, “Doctor,
why are you swelling your earnings by making me swallow all these
useless medicines? Since my life has become so wretched, give me
something to carry me off!”

‘ “Come, come,” said the doctor. “You mustn’t talk like that.”

‘It cut me to the quick to hear such a thing. As soon as the doctor had
gone, I went to my wife’s room and sat on the edge of her bed, slowly
stroking her forehead. “It’s very hot in this room,” she said. “You go out.
It’s time for your walk. If you don’t go, you won’t feel hungry in the
evening.”

‘Going for a walk meant going to the doctor’s house. I had told my
wife that I needed to be out for some of the day in order to work up an
appetite. I’m certain now that she saw through this deception. I was
stupid, so I thought she was stupid too.’

Dakshinacharan was silent again after this, with his head in his hands.
At last he said, ‘Give me a glass of water.’ He drank the water and went
on:

‘One day the doctor’s daughter Manorama expressed a desire to meet my
wife. I wasn’t exactly pleased with this proposal, but I had no reason to
refuse it. So one evening she came along to where we were staying.

‘My wife was in even greater pain than usual. On days when the pain
was bad, she would lie totally still and silent: only when she clenched
her fist or looked blue in the face could one tell what agony she was in.
There was no movement at all in the room that evening; I sat quietly on
the edge of the bed. Maybe she had no strength to tell me to go for my
walk, or maybe she wanted me to stay with her at a time of such
suffering. The kerosene light was by the door, in case it hurt her eyes.
All that could be heard in the hushed darkness was a heavy sigh from
my wife whenever the pain abated.

‘Manorama appeared at the door, and the light from the kerosene
lamp fell on to her face. She lingered in the doorway, making out
nothing at first in the mixture of light and dark. My wife started and
clutched my hand. “Who’s she?” she said. Frightened in her weakened
state by the sight of an unknown person, she muttered two or three
times, “Who’s she? Who’s she? Who’s she?”

‘Like a fool, I first replied, “I don’t know.” But something seemed to
lash me like a whip as I spoke, and I quickly said, “Oh – she’s Dr Haran’s
daughter.”

‘My wife looked up at me; I couldn’t bring myself to look at her. Then
she murmured to the visitor, “Come in”, and to me, “Hold up the light.”
Manorama came in and sat down. She talked with my wife for a bit.

‘Then the doctor appeared. He had brought two bottles with him from
his dispensary. He showed them to my wife and said, “You should rub
on the lotion in the blue bottle and take the other by mouth. Make sure
you don’t mix them up, for the massage-lotion is very poisonous.”

‘Warning me too to be very careful, he put the bottles on the bedside
table; and as he said goodbye he called his daughter to come with him.
“Why can’t I stay, Father?” she said. “There’s no other woman to help
with the nursing.”

‘ “No, no, please don’t trouble yourself,” said my wife in alarm. “We
have an old servant – she looks after me like a mother.”

‘ “How good your wife is!” said the doctor with a laugh. “She’s nursed
others for so long that she can’t stand anyone nursing her!”

‘As the doctor turned to leave with his daughter, my wife said, “Dr
Haran, my husband has been sitting in this closed room for too long.
Take him out with you.”

‘ “Come,” said the doctor to me, “come with us for a walk by the
river.”

‘I did not demur for long. As we left, the doctor once again warned my
wife about the two bottles.

‘I ate at the doctor’s house that night. It was late when I returned, and
my wife was tossing and turning. Stabbed with remorse, I asked, “Is the
pain worse?”

‘She stared at me, speechlessly, too choked to reply. I ran to fetch the
doctor again. For a long time, the doctor could not make out what was
wrong. Eventually he asked, “Is the pain worse? Why not rub on the
lotion?” He picked up the bottle from the table and, finding it empty,
asked, “Did you drink this medicine by mistake?” By a silent nod, my
wife answered that she had. The doctor immediately rushed back to his
house in a tonga to fetch a stomach-pump. I fell half-senseless on to my
wife’s bed.

‘Then, like a mother soothing a child, she pulled my head on to her
breast and by the touch of her hands tried to convey what she felt. By
the sad touch of her hands, she assured me again and again: “Don’t
grieve, it’s for the best – you’ll be happy, and that makes me die
happily.”

‘When the doctor returned, my wife’s torments were over.’

Complaining of the heat, Dakshinacharan took another drink of water.
Then he stepped outside and walked up and down the verandah a few
times before coming in and sitting down again. He did not seem to want
to go on talking: it was as though I myself was extracting the words from
him by a kind of sorcery. He began again:

‘I married Manorama and returned to Bengal. She had married me with
her father’s permission; but whenever I spoke affectionately to her,
whenever I tried to win her with loving words, she remained solemn and
unsmiling. There were misgivings, perhaps, at the back of her mind that
I didn’t quite fathom. It was at this time that my drinking got out of
hand.

‘One evening early in autumn I was walking with Manorama in our
garden at Baranagar. It was eerily dark. There was no sound even of
birds fluttering their wings in their nest – just the rustling of shadowy
jhāu bushes on either side as we walked.

‘Feeling tired, Manorama reached the white stone seat at the base of
the bakul tree, and lay down with her head on her arms. I sat down next
to her. The darkness was even denser there, though the bits of sky that
were visible were covered with stars. The crickets under the trees were
stitching, as it were, a narrow border of sound along the edge of the robe
of silence that had slipped down from the sky. I had been drinking that
afternoon, and my mind was in a fluid, maudlin state. As the darkness
pressed my eyes, the shadowy shape of my wife’s languid body, the dim
pallor of her loose sari, stirred me with inexorable passion. But she
seemed like a shadow herself – impossible to hold in my arms.

‘Suddenly the darkness over the jhāu bushes seemed to catch fire: a
thin, yellow crescent moon climbed slowly into the sky above the trees,
lighting the face of the woman slumped in her white sari on the white
stone seat. I could hold back no longer. I moved and clasped her hand
and said, “Manorama, you don’t believe me, but I do love you. I shall
never be able to forget you.”

‘I winced in alarm at my own words, remembering I had once spoken
in the very same way to someone else. And that very moment, above the
bakul tree, over the tops of the jhāu bushes, under the yellow slice of the
moon, right from the eastern to the far western bank of the Ganges, a
laugh sped swiftly, a rolling laugh. I cannot describe that heart-rending
laugh, the way it seemed to split the sky. I lost consciousness, and fell
from the stone seat.

‘When I came round, I found I was lying on my bed indoors. My wife
was saying, “Why did you pass out like that?”

‘ “Didn’t you hear?” I replied, trembling. “Didn’t you hear that
laughter, the way it filled the sky!”

‘ “Laughter, you call it?” said my wife, laughing herself. “A huge flock
of birds flew past, I heard the noise of their wings. Do you get frightened
by so little?”

‘In the light of day I could understand that it was indeed a flock of
birds in flight – ducks from the north coming to feed on the river
sandbanks. But by the evening, I could not believe that any more: I felt
that loud laughter was lying in wait to fill the darkness: at the slightest
opportunity it would burst out, splitting the dark and enveloping the
sky. Things reached such a pitch that after dusk each day I was
frightened even to speak to Manorama.

‘I decided to take her on a boat-trip, away from the Baranagar house.
My fears faded in the river’s late autumn breezes. For a few days we
were happy. Lured by the beauty around her, Manorama at last opened
slowly the locked door of her heart.

‘We sailed beyond the Ganges and Kharia and reached the Padma. The
awesome river had started her long winter sleep, lifeless and inert as a
hibernating snake. To the north, barren banks of sand stretched bleakly
towards the horizon; and in the villages on the steep southern banks,
mango-groves quaked and pleaded in the face of the river’s demonic
power. From time to time the Padma rolled over sleepily, and pieces of
the crumbling shore slapped and splashed as they broke away. We found
a good mooring and tied up the boat.

‘One day we wandered far from the boat. As the golden shadows of
the sunset faded, a clear full moon rose up before our eyes; and as a
great, unchecked flood of moonlight spread right up to the horizon, over
vast white sandbanks, I felt as if we alone were wandering in a
boundless dream-world, empty as the moon. Manorama was swathed in
a red shawl, flowing down from her head, wound round her face,
covering her whole body. As the silence thickened, and nothing showed
but an infinite, directionless whiteness and emptiness, Manorama slowly
brought out her hand and gripped mine; she edged close and seemed to
rest the whole of her mind and body, youth and existence on me. My
heart raced, and I wondered if love could ever be fulfilled indoors.
Where is there room for lovers except where the sky is open and naked
and endless like this? We seemed without home, without doors, without
anywhere to return to, free to wander without constraint through this
moonlit emptiness, hand in hand, heading nowhere.

‘Walking like this, we came to a pool of water in the middle of the
sand: the Padma had changed her course and the water had been left
trapped. A long bar of moonlight lay as if in a swoon across that
waveless, sleeping, desert-pool. We stood on the edge together: as
Manorama gazed at me pensively, her shawl slipped from her head. I
lifted her face – gleaming in the moonlight – and kissed her.

‘At once a voice resounded through the empty waste, saying three
times, “Who’s she? Who’s she? Who’s she?” I started in alarm, and my
wife shuddered too. But the next moment we realized it was not a
human voice, not a supernatural one either – just the call of 
the waterbirds scouring the sandbanks. They had been startled by the sight of
people approaching their safe retreat.

‘Shaken by our fear, we hurried back to the boat. We lay on our beds:
Manorama was exhausted and quickly fell asleep. But someone came and
stood by my mosquito-net in the dark, and pointing once at Manorama
with a long, thin, bony finger whispered ever so softly and indistinctly
into my ear, “Who’s she? Who’s she? Who’s she?”

‘I sat up and struck a match for the lamp. Instantly a gale of laughter
swept the shadowy figure away, shaking my mosquito-net, rocking the
boat, turning the blood of my sweat-soaked body to ice as it sped
through the dark night. Over the Padma it went, over the sandbanks,
over the sleeping fields and villages and towns, travelling on and on
across countries and peoples, gradually becoming fainter as it shrank
into the distance; leaving even the realm of life and death; becoming
thinner than the point of a needle, till it was too faint to hear, too faint
to imagine; yet there seemed to be endless sky inside my head whose
borders the sound could never cross however far it travelled. It went on
till I could bear it no more: I decided I’d have to turn out the light or I’d
never sleep – but as soon as I did so and lay down again, immediately
that strangulated voice returned to the darkness next to my mosquitonet, 
close to my ear: “Who’s she? Who’s she? Who’s she?” To the same
rhythm as the blood in my heart it continued: “Who’s she? Who’s she?
Who’s she?… Who’s she? Who’s she? Who’s she?” In the depth of the
night, on that silent boat, my round clock seemed to come to life too, its
hands pointing from the shelf at Manorama, and saying with its ticktock, 
“Who’s she? Who’s she? Who’s she?… Who’s she? Who’s she?  Who’s she?” ’

Dakshinacharan Babu had turned yellow as he spoke, and his voice was
hoarse. ‘Drink some more water,’ I said, touching him. My kerosene
lamp guttered and went out. I noticed that it was getting light outside.
The crows were cawing. Magpie-robins were whistling. An ox-cart
creaked past on the road in front of my house. Dakshinacharan’s
expression changed: there was no sign of fear any more. He seemed
ashamed that the sorcery of the night and the frenzy of his imaginary
fears had made him tell me so much. I felt that he blamed it on me.
Without a single civil word, he abruptly rose and left the house.

The next night, half-way through, there was a knocking at my door
again, and the sound of ‘Doctor! Doctor!’

