My five-year-old daughter Mini can’t stop talking for a minute. It only
took her a year to learn to speak, after coming into the world, and ever
since she has not wasted a minute of her waking hours by keeping silent.
Her mother often scolds her and makes her shut up, but I can’t do that.
When Mini is quiet, it is so unnatural that I cannot bear it. So she’s
rather keen on chatting to me.

One morning, as I was starting the seventeenth chapter of my novel,
Mini came up to me and said, ‘Father, Ramdoyal the gatekeeper calls a
crow a kauyā instead of a kāk. He doesn’t know anything, does he!’

Before I had a chance to enlighten her about the multiplicity of
languages in the world, she brought up another subject. ‘Guess what,
Father, Bhola says it rains when an elephant in the sky squirts water
through its trunk. What nonsense he talks! On and on, all day.’

Without waiting for my opinion on this matter either, she suddenly
asked, ‘Father, what relation is Mother to you?’

‘Good question,’1 I said to myself, but to Mini I said, ‘Run off and play
with Bhola. I’ve got work to do.’

But she then sat down near my feet beside my writing-table, and,
slapping her knees, began to recite ‘āgḍum bāgḍum’ at top speed.
Meanwhile, in my seventeenth chapter, Pratap Singh was leaping under
cover of night from his high prison-window into the river below, with
Kanchanmala in his arms.

My study looks out on to the road. Mini suddenly abandoned the
‘āgḍum bāgḍum’ game, ran over to the window and shouted,
‘Kabuliwallah, Kabuliwallah!’

Dressed in dirty baggy clothes, pugree on his head, bag hanging from
his shoulder, and with three or four boxes of grapes in his hands, a tall
Kabuliwallah was ambling along the road. It was hard to say exactly
what thoughts the sight of him had put into my beloved daughter’s
mind, but she began to shout and shriek at him. That swinging bag spells
trouble, I thought: my seventeenth chapter won’t get finished today. But
just as the Kabuliwallah, attracted by Mini’s yells, looked towards us
with a smile and started to approach our house, Mini gasped and ran
into the inner rooms, disappearing from view. She had a blind
conviction that if one looked inside that swinging bag one would find
three or four live children like her.

Meanwhile the Kabuliwallah came up to the window and smilingly
salaamed. I decided that although the plight of Pratap Singh and
Kanchanmala was extremely critical, it would be churlish not to invite
the fellow inside and buy something from him.

I bought something. Then I chatted to him for a bit. We talked about
Abdur Rahman’s efforts to preserve the integrity of Afghanistan against
the Russians and the British. When he got up to leave, he asked, ‘Babu,
where did your little girl go?’

To dispel her groundless fears, I called Mini to come out. She clung to
me and looked suspiciously at the Kabuliwallah and his bag. The
Kabuliwallah took some raisins and apricots out and offered them to her,
but she would not take them, and clung to my knees with doubled
suspicion. Thus passed her first meeting with the Kabuliwallah.

A few days later when for some reason I was on my way out of the house
one morning, I saw my daughter sitting on a bench in front of the door,
nattering unrestrainedly; and the Kabuliwallah was sitting at her feet
listening – grinning broadly, and from time to time making comments in
his hybrid sort of Bengali. In all her five years of life, Mini had never
found so patient a listener, apart from her father. I also saw that the fold
of her little sari was crammed with raisins and nuts. I said to the
Kabuliwallah, ‘Why have you given all these? Don’t give her any more.’ I
then took a half-rupee out of my pocket and gave it to him. He
unhesitatingly took the coin and put it in his bag.

When I returned home, I found that this half-rupee had caused a fullscale 
row. Mini’s mother was holding up a round shining object and
saying crossly to Mini, ‘Where did you get this half-rupee from?’

‘The Kabuliwallah gave it to me,’ said Mini.

‘Why did you take it from the Kabuliwallah?’ said her mother.

‘I didn’t ask for it,’ said Mini tearfully. ‘He gave it to me himself.’

I rescued Mini from her mother’s wrath, and took her outside. I learnt
that this was not just the second time that Mini and the Kabuliwallah
had met: he had been coming nearly every day and, by bribing her eager
little heart with pistachio-nuts, had quite won her over. I found that they
now had certain fixed jokes and routines: for example as soon as Mini
saw Rahamat, she giggled and asked, ‘Kabuliwallah, O Kabuliwallah,
what have you got in your bag?’ Rahamat would laugh back and say –
giving the word a peculiar nasal twang – ‘An elephant.’ The notion of an
elephant in his bag was the source of immense hilarity; it might not be a
very subtle joke, but they both seemed to find it very funny, and it gave
me pleasure to see, on an autumn morning, a young child and a grown
man laughing so heartily.

They had a couple of other jokes. Rahamat would say to Mini, ‘Little
one, don’t ever go off to your śvaśurbāri.’ Most Bengali girls grow up
hearing frequent references to their svaśur-bāri, but my wife and I are
rather progressive people and we don’t keep talking to our young
daughter about her future marriage. She therefore couldn’t clearly
understand what Rahamat meant; yet to remain silent and give no reply
was wholly against her nature, so she would turn the idea round and
say, ‘Are you going to your śvaśurbāri?’ Shaking his huge fist at an
imaginary father-in-law Rahamat said, ‘I’ll settle him!’ Mini laughed
merrily as she imagined the fate awaiting this unknown creature called a
śvaśur.

It was perfect autumn weather. In ancient times, kings used to set out on
their world-conquests in autumn. I have never been away from Calcutta;
precisely because of that, my mind roves all over the world. I seem to be
condemned to my house, but I constantly yearn for the world outside. If
I hear the name of a foreign land, at once my heart races towards it; and
if I see a foreigner, at once an image of a cottage on some far bank or
wooded mountainside forms in my mind, and I think of the free and
pleasant life I would lead there. At the same time, I am such a rooted
sort of individual that whenever I have to leave my familiar spot I
practically collapse. So a morning spent sitting at my table in my little
study, chatting with this Kabuliwallah, was quite enough wandering for
me. High, scorched, blood-coloured, forbidding mountains on either side
of a narrow desert path; laden camels passing; turbaned merchants and
wayfarers, some on camels, some walking, some with spears in their
hands, some with old-fashioned flintlock guns: my friend would talk of
his native land in his booming, broken Bengali, and a mental picture of
it would pass before my eyes.

Mini’s mother is very easily alarmed. The slightest noise in the street
makes her think that all the world’s drunkards are charging straight at
our house. She cannot dispel from her mind – despite her experience of
life (which isn’t great) – the apprehension that the world is overrun with
thieves, bandits, drunkards, snakes, tigers, malaria, caterpillars,
cockroaches and white-skinned marauders. She was not too happy about
Rahamat the Kabuliwallah. She repeatedly told me to keep a close eye
on him. If I tried to laugh off her suspicions, she would launch into a
succession of questions: ‘So do people’s children never go missing? And
is there no slavery in Afghanistan? Is it completely impossible for a huge
Afghan to kidnap a little child?’ I had to admit that it was not
impossible, but I found it hard to believe. People are suggestible to
varying degrees; this was why my wife remained so edgy. But I still saw
nothing wrong in letting Rahamat come to our house.

Every year, about the middle of the month of Māgh, Rahamat went
home. He was always very busy before he left, collecting money owed to
him. He had to go from house to house; but he still made time to visit
Mini. To see them together, one might well suppose that they were
plotting something. If he couldn’t come in the morning he would come
in the evening; to see his lanky figure in a corner of the darkened house,
with his baggy pyjamas hanging loosely around him, was indeed a little
frightening. But my heart would light up as Mini ran to meet him,
smiling and calling, ‘O Kabuliwallah, Kabuliwallah,’ and the usual
innocent jokes passed between the two friends, unequal in age though
they were.

One morning I was sitting in my little study correcting proof-sheets.
The last days of winter had been very cold, shiveringly so. The morning
sun was shining through the window on to my feet below my table, and
this touch of warmth was very pleasant. It must have been about eight
o’clock – early morning walkers, swathed in scarves, had mostly finished
their dawn stroll and had returned to their homes. It was then that there
was a sudden commotion in the street.

I looked out and saw our Rahamat in handcuffs, being marched along
by two policemen, and behind him a crowd of curious boys. Rahamat’s
clothes were blood-stained, and one of the policemen was holding a
blood-soaked knife. I went outside and stopped him, asking what was
up. I heard partly from him and partly from Rahamat himself that a
neighbour of ours had owed Rahamat something for a Rampuri chadar;
he had tried to lie his way out of the debt, and in the ensuing brawl
Rahamat had stabbed him.

Rahamat was mouthing various unrepeatable curses against the lying
debtor, when Mini ran out of the house calling, ‘Kabuliwallah, O
Kabuliwallah.’ For a moment Rahamat’s face lit up with pleasure. He
had no bag over his shoulder today, so they couldn’t have their usual
discussion about it. Mini came straight out with her ‘Are you going to
your śvaśur-bāṛi?’

‘Yes, I’m going there now,’ said Rahamat with a smile. But when he
saw that his reply had failed to amuse Mini, he brandished his
handcuffed fists and said, ‘I would have killed my śvaśur, but how can I
with these on?’

Rahamat was convicted of assault, and sent to prison for several years.
He virtually faded from our minds. Living at home, carrying on day by
day with our routine tasks, we gave no thought to how a free-spirited
mountain-dweller was passing his years behind prison-walls. As for the
fickle Mini, even her father would have to admit that her behaviour was
not very praiseworthy. She swiftly forgot her old friend. At first Nabi the
groom replaced him in her affections; later, as she grew up, girls rather
than little boys became her favourite companions. She even stopped
coming to her father’s study. And I, in a sense, dropped her.
Several years went by. It was autumn again. Mini’s marriage had been
decided, and the wedding was fixed for the pūjā-holiday. Our pride and
joy would soon, like Durga going to Mount Kailas, darken her parents’
house by moving to her husband’s.

It was a most beautiful morning. Sunlight, washed clean by monsoon
rains, seemed to shine with the purity of smelted gold. Its radiance lent
an extraordinary grace to Calcutta’s back-streets, with their squalid,
tumbledown, cheek-by-jowl dwellings. The sānāi started to play in our
house when night was scarcely over. Its wailing vibrations seemed to
rise from deep within my ribcage. Its sad Bhairavī rāga joined forces
with the autumn sunshine, in spreading through the world the grief of
my imminent separation. Today my Mini would be married.

From dawn on there was uproar, endless coming and going. A canopy
was being erected in the yard of the house, by binding bamboo-poles
together; chandeliers tinkled as they were hung in the rooms and
verandahs; there was constant loud talk.

I was sitting in my study doing accounts, when Rahamat suddenly
appeared and salaamed before me. At first I didn’t recognize him. He
had no bag; he had lost his long hair; his former vigour had gone. But
when he smiled, I recognized him.

‘How are you, Rahamat?’ I said. ‘When did you come?’

‘I was let out of prison yesterday evening,’ he replied.

His words startled me. I had never confronted a would-be murderer
before; I shrank back at the sight of him. I began to feel that on this
auspicious morning it would be better to have the man out of the way.
‘We’ve got something on in our house today,’ I said. ‘I’m rather busy.
Please go now.’

He was ready to go at once, but just as he reached the door he
hesitated a little and said, ‘Can’t I see your little girl for a moment?’
It seemed he thought that Mini was still just as she was when he had
known her: that she would come running as before, calling
‘Kabuliwallah, O Kabuliwallah!’; that their old merry banter would
resume. He had even brought (remembering their old friendship) a box
of grapes and a few nuts and raisins wrapped in paper – extracted, no
doubt, from some Afghan friend of his, having no bag of his own now.
‘There’s something on in the house today,’ I said. ‘You can’t see
anyone.’

He looked rather crestfallen. He stood silently for a moment longer,
casting a solemn glance at me; then, saying ‘Babu salaam’, he walked
towards the door. I felt a sudden pang. I thought of calling him back, but
then I saw that he himself was returning.

‘I brought this box of grapes and these nuts and raisins for the little
one,’ he said. ‘Please give them to her.’ Taking them from him, I was
about to pay him for them when he suddenly clasped my arm and said,
‘Please, don’t give me any money – I shall always be grateful, Babu. Just
as you have a daughter, so do I have one, in my own country. It is with
her in mind that I came with a few raisins for your daughter: I didn’t
come to trade with you.’

Then he put a hand inside his big loose shirt and took out from
somewhere close to his heart a crumpled piece of paper. Unfolding it
very carefully, he spread it out on my table. There was a small handprint
on the paper: not a photograph, not a painting – the hand had been
rubbed with some soot and pressed down on to the paper. Every year
Rahamat carried this memento of his daughter in his breast-pocket when
he came to sell raisins in Calcutta’s streets: as if the touch of that soft,
small, childish hand brought solace to his huge, homesick breast. My
eyes swam at the sight of it. I forgot then that he was an Afghan 
raisinseller and I was a Bengali Babu. I understood then that he was as I am,
that he was a father just as I am a father. The handprint of his little
mountain-dwelling Parvati reminded me of my own Mini.

At once I sent for her from the inner part of the house. Objections
came back: I refused to listen to them. Mini, dressed as a bride – sandalpaste 
pattern on her brow, red silk sari – came timidly into the room and
stood close by me.

The Kabuliwallah was confused at first when he saw her: he couldn’t
bring himself to utter his old greeting. But at last he smiled and said,
‘Little one, are you going to your śvasur-bāṛi?’

Mini now knew the meaning of śvaśur-bāṛi; she couldn’t reply as
before – she blushed at Rahamat’s question and looked away. I recalled
the day when Mini and the Kabuliwallah had first met. My heart ached.

Mini left the room, and Rahamat, sighing deeply, sat down on the
floor. He suddenly understood clearly that his own daughter would have
grown up too since he last saw her, and with her too he would have to
become re-acquainted: he would not find her exactly as she was before.
Who knew what had happened to her these eight years? In the cool
autumn morning sunshine the sānāi went on playing, and Rahamat sat in
a Calcutta lane and pictured to himself the barren mountains of
Afghanistan.

I took out a banknote and gave it to him. ‘Rahamat,’ I said, ‘go back to
your homeland and your daughter; by your blessed reunion, Mini will be
blessed.’

By giving him this money, I had to trim certain items from the
wedding-festivities. I wasn’t able to afford the electric illuminations I
had planned, nor did the trumpet-and-drum band come. The womenfolk
were very displeased at this; but for me, the ceremony was lit by a
kinder, more gracious light.
