Raicharan was twelve when he first came to work in the house. He was
from Jessore district and had long hair and large eyes; a slender boy
with gleaming dark skin. His employers, like him, were Kaisthas. His
main duty was to help with looking after their one-year-old son – who in
time progressed from Raicharan’s arms to school, from school to college,
and from college to being munsiff in the local court. Raicharan had
remained his servant. But now there was a mistress as well as a master
in the household, and most of the rights that Raicharan had hitherto had
over Anukul Babu passed to her.

Although his former responsibilities were diminished by her presence,
she largely replaced them with a new one. A son to Anukul was soon
born, and was won over completely by the sheer force of Raicharan’s
devotion. He swung him about with such enthusiasm, tossed him in the
air with such dexterity, cooed and shook his head in his face so
vigorously, chanted so many meaningless random questions for which
there could be no reply, that the very sight of Raicharan sent the little
master into raptures.

When the boy learnt to crawl stealthily over a door-sill, giggling with
merriment if anyone tried to catch him, and speedily making for
somewhere safe to hide, Raicharan was entranced by such uncommon
skill and quickness of decision. He would go to the child’s mother and
say admiringly, ‘Mā, your son will be a judge when he grows up – he’ll
earn a fortune.’ That there were other children in the world who could
at this young age dart over a door-sill was beyond Raicharan’s
imagination; only future judges could perform such feats. His first
faltering steps were amazing too, and when he began to call his mother
‘Ma’, his pisimā ‘Pishi’, and Raicharan ‘Channa’, Raicharan proclaimed
these staggering achievements to everyone he met. How astonishing it
was that he should not only call his mother ‘Ma’, his aunt ‘Pishi’, but
also Raicharan ‘Channa’! Really, it was hard to understand where such
intelligence had sprung from. Certainly no adult could ever show such
extraordinary intelligence, and people would be unsure of his fitness to
be a judge even if he could.

Before long, Raicharan had to put a string round his neck and pretend
to be a horse; or he had to be a wrestler and fight with the boy – and if
he failed to let himself be defeated and thrown to the ground, there
would be hell to pay. By now, Anukul had been transferred to a Padma
river district. He had brought a push-chair from Calcutta for his son.
Raicharan would dress him in a satin shirt, gold-embroidered cap,
golden bangles and a pair of anklets, and take the young prince out in
his push-chair twice a day for some air.

The rainy season came. The Padma began to swallow up gardens,
villages and fields in great hungry gulps. Thickets and bushes
disappeared from the sandbanks. The menacing gurgle of water was all
around, and the splashing of crumbling banks; and swirling, rushing
foam showed how fierce the river’s current had become.

One afternoon, when it was cloudy but did not look like rain,
Raicharan’s capricious young master refused to stay at home. He climbed
into his push-chair and Raicharan gingerly pushed it to the river-bank
beyond the paddy-fields. There were no boats on the river, no people
working in the fields: through gaps in the clouds, the sun could be seen
preparing with silent fiery ceremony to set behind the deserted
sandbanks across the river. Suddenly peace was broken by the boy
pointing and calling, ‘Fowers, Channa, fowers!’ A little way off there was
a huge kadamba tree on a wet, muddy stretch of land, with some flowers
on its upper branches: these were what had caught the boy’s attention.
(A few days previously, Raicharan had strung some flowers on to sticks
and made him a ‘kadamba-cart’; he had had such fun pulling it along
with a string that Raicharan did not have to put on reins that day – an
instant promotion from horse to groom.)

‘Channa’ was not very willing to squelch through the mud to pick the
flowers. He quickly pointed in the other direction and said, ‘Look, look
at that bird – flying – now it’s gone. Come, bird, come!’ He pushed the
chair forward fast, burbling on in this way. But it was futile to try to
distract by so simple a device a boy who would one day become a judge
especially as there was nothing particular to attract his attention
anywhere, and imaginary birds would not work for very long. ‘All right,’
said Raicharan, ‘you sit in the chair and I’ll get you the flowers. Be good
now, don’t go near the water.’ Tucking his dhoti up above his knees, he
headed for the kadamba tree.

But the fact that he had been forbidden to go near the water
immediately attracted the boy’s mind away from the kadamba-flowers
and towards the water. He saw it gurgling and swirling along, as if a
thousand wavelets were naughtily, merrily escaping to a forbidden place
beyond the reach of some mighty Raicharan. The boy was thrilled by
their mischievous example. He gently stepped down from his chair, and
edged his way to the water. Picking a long reed, he leant forward,
pretending the reed was a fishing-rod: the romping gurgling wavelets
seemed to be murmuring an invitation to the boy to come and join their
game.

There was a single plopping sound, but on the bank of the Padma
river in monsoon spate many such sounds can be heard. Raicharan had
filled the fold of his dhoti with kadamba-flowers. Climbing down from
the tree, he made his way back towards the push-chair, smiling – but
then he saw that the child was not there. Looking all around, he saw no
sign of him anywhere. His blood froze: the universe was suddenly unreal
– pale and murky as smoke. A single desperate cry burst from his
breaking heart: ‘Master, little master, my sweet, good little master!’ But
no one called out ‘Channa’ in reply, no childish mischievous laugh came
back. The Padma went on rushing and swirling and gurgling as before,
as if it knew nothing and had no time to attend to the world’s minor
occurrences.

As evening fell the boy’s mother grew anxious and sent people out to
search with lanterns. When they reached the river-bank, they found
Raicharan wandering over the fields like a midnight storm-wind,
sobbing, ‘Master, my little master!’ At last he returned home and threw
himself at his mistress’s feet, crying in reply to all her questions, ‘I don’t
know, Mā, I don’t know.’

Although everyone knew in their hearts that the Padma was the
culprit, suspicion fell on a group of gypsies encamped at the edge of the
village. The mistress of the house even began to suspect that Raicharan
had stolen the boy – so much so that she called him and entreated,
‘Bring back my child! I’ll give you whatever money you want.’ But
Raicharan could only beat his brow, and she ordered him from her sight.
Anukul Babu tried to dispel his wife’s unfounded suspicion: what motive
could Raicharan have had for so vile an act? ‘What do you mean?’ said
his wife. ‘The boy had gold ornaments on him.’

II
Raicharan went back to his home village. His wife had not borne him a
child, and he had long ceased to hope for one. But it so happened that
before the year had ended his ageing wife gave birth to a son – and then
soon afterwards died.

At first Raicharan had nothing but hatred for the newly born child,
who he felt had somehow taken the little master’s place by deceit. It
seemed a deadly sin to delight in his own son after allowing his master’s
only son to be washed away. If his widowed sister had not been there,
the child would not have breathed Earth’s air for long.

Amazing it was, but after a few months the child began to crawl over
the door-sill and show a merry ability to evade all sorts of restrictions.
He chuckled and wailed just as the little master had done. Sometimes
when Raicharan heard him cry his heart missed a beat; it was just as if
the little master were crying somewhere for his lost Raicharan. Phelna –
that was what Raicharan’s sister called the boy – began in due course to
call her ‘Pishi’. When Raicharan heard that familiar name one day, he
suddenly thought, ‘The little master cannot do without my love: he has
been born again in my house.’

There were several convincing proofs in favour of this belief. First,
there was the short interval between the death and the birth. Second, his
wife could not, at so advanced an age, have conceived a son merely
through her own fecundity. Third, the child crawled, toddled and called
his aunt ‘Pishi’ just as the little master had done. There was much to
indicate that he too would grow up to become a judge. Raicharan then
remembered the strong suspicions the mistress of the house had had, and
he realized with astonishment that her maternal instinct had rightly told
her that someone had stolen her son. He now felt deeply ashamed of the
way he had neglected the child: devotion took hold of him again. From
now on he brought him up like a rich man’s son. He bought him satin
shirts and a gold-embroidered cap. His dead wife’s ornaments were
melted down to make bangles and bracelets for him. He forbade him
from playing with the local children; all day long he himself was the
child’s sole playmate. Whenever they got the chance, the local boys
would mock Phelna for being a ‘prince’, and the villagers marvelled at
Raicharan’s odd behaviour.

When Phelna was old enough to go to school, Raicharan sold his land
and took the boy to Calcutta. With great difficulty he found a job, and
sent Phelna to a high-class school. He skimped and scraped to get the
boy good food and clothing and a decent education, saying to himself, ‘If
it was love for me that brought you into my house, dear child, then you
must have nothing but the best.’

Twelve years passed in this way. The boy did well at his studies and
was fine to behold: sturdily built, with a dark, glossy complexion. He
took great trouble over his hair; his tastes were refined and cultured. He
could never think of his father quite as his father, because Raicharan
treated him with a father’s affection but a servant’s devotion. To his
discredit, Phelna never told anyone that Raicharan was his father. The
students in the hostel where Phelna lived were always making fun of the
rustic Raicharan; and it cannot be denied that when his father was not
present Phelna joined in the fun. But everyone was fond of the mild,
doting Raicharan, and Phelna also loved him – but (to repeat) not quite
as his father: affection was mixed with condescension.

Raicharan grew old. His employer was perpetually finding fault with
him. His health was deteriorating, and he could not concentrate on his
work: he was getting forgetful. But no employer who pays full wages
will accept old age as an excuse. Moreover, the cash that Raicharan had
raised by selling off his possessions was nearly at an end. Phelna was
always complaining now that he was short of proper clothes and
luxuries.

III

One day Raicharan suddenly resigned from his job, and giving Phelna
some money said, ‘Something has happened – I need to go back to the
village for a few days.’ He then set off for Barasat, where Anukul Babu
was now munsiff.

Anukul had had no other child. His wife still grieved for her son.
One evening Anukul was resting after returning from the court, while
his wife, at great expense, purchased from a sannyāsī a holy root and a
blessing that would bring her a child. A voice was heard in the yard:
‘Greetings, Mā.’

‘Who’s there?’ said Anukul Babu.

Raicharan appeared. ‘I am Raicharan,’ he said, taking the dust of his
former master’s feet.

Anukul’s heart melted at the sight of the old man. He asked him
numerous questions about his present circumstances, and invited him to
work for him again.

Raicharan smiled weakly and said, ‘Let me pay my respects to
Māthākrun.’

Anukul Babu took him through to the inner rooms of the house. His
wife was not nearly so pleased to see Raicharan, but Raicharan took no
notice of this and said with clasped hands, ‘Master, Mā, it was I who
stole your son. It was not the Padma, it was no one else, it was I,
ungrateful wretch that I am.’

‘What are you saying?’ said Anukul. ‘Where is he?’

‘He lives with me,’ said Raicharan. ‘I’ll bring him the day after
tomorrow.’

That was Sunday, and the courts were closed. Husband and wife
watched the road anxiously from dawn. At ten o’clock, Raicharan
arrived with Phelna.

Anukul’s wife without thought or question drew him on to her lap,
touched him, sniffed him, eyed his face intently, cried and laughed
nervously. Truly, the boy was fine to look at – nothing in his looks or
dress suggested a poor background. There was a very loving, modest,
bashful expression in his face. At the sight of him, Anukul’s heart too
swelled with love. But keeping his composure, he asked, ‘What proof
have you?’

How can such an act be proved?’ said Raicharan. ‘Only God knows
that I stole your son; no one else in the world knows.’

Anukul thought the matter over and decided that since his wife had
embraced the boy as her own with such fervour it would not be
appropriate to search for proof now; whatever the truth might be, it was
best to believe. In any case, how could Raicharan have acquired such a
boy? And why should the old servant wish to mislead them now?
Questioning the boy, he learnt that he had lived with Raicharan from an
early age and had called him Father, but that Raicharan had never
behaved towards him like a father – he had been more like a servant.
Driving all doubt from his mind, Anukul said, ‘But, Raicharan, you must
not darken our door again now.’

With clasped hands and quavering voice Raicharan replied, ‘I am old
now, master. Where shall I go?’

‘Let him stay,’ said the mistress of the house. ‘I have forgiven him. Let
our son be blessed.’

‘He cannot be forgiven for what he has done,’ said the righteous
Anukul.

‘I didn’t do it,’ cried Raicharan, embracing his master’s feet. ‘God did
it.’

Even angrier now that Raicharan should lay the blame for his own sin
on to God, Anukul said, ‘One should not place trust in someone who has
betrayed trust so heinously.’

Rising from Anukul’s feet, Raicharan said, ‘It was not I, Master.’

‘Then who was it?’

‘It was my Fate.’

No educated man could be satisfied by such an explanation.

‘I have no one else in the world,’ said Raicharan.

Phelna was certainly rather annoyed that Raicharan had stolen him –
a munsiff’s son – and dishonourably claimed him as his own. But he said
generously to Anukul, ‘Father, please pardon him. If you won’t let him
stay in the house, then give him a monthly allowance.

Raicharan, saying nothing, looked once at his son and made an
obeisance to all; then he went out through the door and disappeared into
the world’s multitude. At the end of the month, when Anukul sent a
small sum to Raicharan at his village address, the money came back. No
one of that name was known there.
