When a daughter was born, after five sons, her parents dotingly named
her Nirupama. 2 Such a high-flown name had never been heard in the
family before. Usually names of gods and goddesses were used – Ganesh,
Kartik, Parvati and so on.

The question of Nirupama’s marriage now arose. Her father
Ramsundar Mitra searched and searched without finding a groom he
really liked; but in the end he procured the only son of a grand
Raybahadur. The ancestral wealth of this Raybahadur had diminished
considerably, but the family was certainly noble. They asked for a dowry
of 10,000 rupees, and many additional gifts. Ramsundar agreed without
a thought – such a groom should not be allowed to slip through one’s
fingers. But no way could he raise all the money. Even after pawning,
selling, and using every method he could, he still owed 6,000 or 7,000
rupees; and the day of the wedding was drawing near.

The wedding-day came. Someone had agreed to lend the rest of the
money at an extortionate rate of interest, but he failed to turn up on the
day. A furious scene broke out in the marriage-room. Ramsundar fell on
his knees before the Raybahadur, implored him not to bring bad luck by
breaking off the ceremony, insisted he would pay him in full. ‘If you
can’t hand the money to me, now,’ replied the Raybahadur, ‘the
bridegroom will not be brought here.’

The women of the house wept and wailed at this disastrous upset. The
root cause of it sat mutely in her silk wedding-dress and ornaments, her
forehead decorated with sandal-paste. It cannot be said that she felt
much love or respect for her prospective husband’s family.

Suddenly the impasse was resolved. The groom rebelled against his
father, saying firmly, ‘This haggling and bartering means nothing to me.
I came here to marry, and marry I shall.’

‘You see, sir, how young men behave these days,’ said his father to
everyone he turned to.

‘It’s because they have no training in morality or the Shastras,’ said
some of the oldest there. The Raybahadur sat despondent at seeing the
poisonous fruits of modern education in his own son. The marriage was
completed in a gloomy, joyless sort of way.

As Nirupama left for her in-laws’ house her father clasped her to his
breast and could not hold back his tears. ‘Won’t they let me come and
visit you, father?’ she asked. ‘Why shouldn’t they, my love?’ said
Ramsundar. ‘I’ll come and fetch you.’

Ramsundar often went to see his daughter, but he had no honour in
his son-in-law’s house. Even the servants looked down on him.
Sometimes he saw his daughter for five minutes in a separate outer room
of the house; sometimes he was not allowed to see her at all. To be
disgraced so in a kinsman’s house was unbearable. He decided that
somehow or other the money would have to be paid, but the burden of
debt on his shoulders was already hard to control. Expenses dragged at
him terribly; he had to resort to all sorts of petty subterfuges to avoid
running into his creditors.

Meanwhile his daughter was treated spitefully at every turn. She shut
herself into her room and wept – a daily penance for the insults heaped
on her family. Her mother-in-law’s assaults were especially vicious. If
anyone said, ‘How pretty the girl is – it’s a pleasure to look at her,’ she
would burst out, ‘Pretty indeed! Pretty as the family she came from!’
Even her food and clothing were neglected. If a kind neighbour
expressed concern, her mother-in-law would say, ‘She has more than
enough,’ – implying that if the girl’s father had paid full price she would
have received full care. Everyone treated her as if she had no rights in
the household, and had entered it by deceit.

Naturally news of the contempt and shame his daughter was suffering
reached Ramsundar. He decided to sell his house. He did not, however,
tell his sons that he was making them houseless: he intended to rent the
house back after selling it. By this ploy, his sons would not know the
true situation till after his death. But his sons found out. They came and
protested vigorously. The three elder boys, particularly, were married
and probably had children: their objections were so forceful that the sale
was stopped. Ramsundar then started to raise money by taking out small
loans from various quarters at high interest – so much so, that he could
no longer meet household expenses.

Nirupama understood everything from her father’s expression. The old
man’s grey hair, pallid face and permanently cowering manner all
indicated poverty and worry. When a father lets down his own daughter,
he cannot disguise the guilt he feels. Whenever Ramsundar managed to
get permission to speak to his daughter for a few moments, it was clear
at once even from his smile how heart-broken he was.

She longed to return to her father’s house for a few days to console
him. To see his sad face made it awful to be away. One day she said to
Ramsundar, ‘Father, take me home for a while.’

‘Very well,’ he replied – but he had no power to do so, the natural
claims that a father has to his daughter had been pawned in place of a
dowry. Even a glimpse of his daughter had to be begged for meekly, and
if on any occasion it was not granted he was not in a position to ask a
second time. But if his daughter herself wished to come home, how
could he not bring her?

It is better not to tell the story of the indignity, shame and hurt that
Ramsundar had to endure in order to raise the 3,000 rupees that he
needed for an approach to his daughter’s father-in-law. Wrapping the
banknotes in a handkerchief tied into a corner of his chadar, he went to
see him. He began breezily with local news, describing at length a daring
theft in Harekrishna’s house. Comparing the abilities and characters of
Nabinmadhab and Radhamadhab, he praised Radhamadhab and
criticized Nabinmadhab. He gave a hair-raising account of a new illness
in town. Finally, putting down the hookah, he said as if in passing, ‘Yes,
yes, brother, there’s still some money owing, I know. Every day I
remember, and mean to come along with some of it, but then it slips my
mind. I’m getting old, my friend.’ At the end of this long preamble, he
casually produced the three notes, which were really like three of his
ribs. The Raybahadur burst into coarse laughter at the sight of them.
‘Those are no use to me,’ he said, making it plain by using a current
proverb that he did not want to make his hands stink for no reason.

After that, to ask to bring Nirupama home seemed out of the question,
though Ramsundar wondered what good he was doing to himself by
observing polite forms. After sitting in heart-stricken silence for a long
time, he did at last softly raise the matter. ‘Not now,’ said the
Raybahadur, giving no reason; then he left, to go about his work.

Unable to face his daughter, hands trembling, Ramsundar tied the
three banknotes back into the end of his chadar and set off home. He
resolved never to return to the Raybahadur’s house until he had paid the
money in full; only then could he lay claim to Nirupama confidently.

Many months passed. Nirupama sent messenger after messenger, but
her father never appeared. In the end she took offence, and stopped
sending. This grieved Ramsundar sorely, but he still would not go to her.
The month of Āśvin came. ‘This year I shall bring Nirupama home for
the pūjā or else!’ he said to himself, making a fierce vow.

On the fifth or sixth day of the pūjā-fortnight, Ramsundar once again
tied a few notes into the end of his chadar and got ready to go out. A
five-year-old grandson came and said, ‘Grandpa, are you going to buy a
cart for me?’ For weeks he had set his heart on a push-cart to ride in, but
there had been no way of meeting his wish. Then a six-year-old
granddaughter came and said tearfully that she had no nice dress to
wear for the pūjā. Ramsundar knew that well, and had brooded over it
for a long time as he smoked. He had sighed to think of the women of
his household attending the pūjā celebrations at the Raybahadur’s house
like paupers receiving charity, wearing whatever miserable ornaments
they had; but his thoughts had no result other than making the old man’s
lines on his forehead even deeper.

With the cries of his poverty-stricken household ringing in his ears,
Ramsundar arrived at the Raybahadur’s house. Today there was no
hesitation in his manner, no trace of the nervous glances with which he
had formerly approached the gatekeeper and servants: it was as if he
was entering his own house. He was told that the Raybahadur was out –
he would have to wait a while. But he could not hold back his longing to
meet his daughter. Tears of joy rolled down his cheeks when he saw her.
Father and daughter wept together; neither of them could speak for
some moments. Then Ramsundar said, ‘This time I shall take you, my
dear. Nothing can stop me now.’

Suddenly Ramsundar’s eldest son Haramohan burst into the room with
his two small sons. ‘Father,’ he cried, ‘have you really decided to turn us
out on the streets?’

Ramsundar flared up. ‘Should I condemn myself to hell for your
sakes? Won’t you let me do what is right?’ He had sold his house: he had
gone to great lengths to conceal the sale from his sons, but to his anger
and dismay it appeared that they had found out all the same. His
grandson clasped him round his knees and looked up, saying, ‘Grandpa,
haven’t you bought me that cart?’ When he got no answer from the now
crestfallen Ramsundar, the little boy went up to Nirupama and said,
‘Auntie, will you buy me a cart?’

Nirupama had no difficulty in understanding the whole situation.
‘Father,’ she said, ‘if you give a single paisa more to my father-in-law, I
swear solemnly you will never see me again.’

‘What are you saying, child?’ said Ramsundar. ‘If I don’t pay the
money, the shame will be forever on my head – and it will be your
shame too.’

‘The shame will be greater if you pay the money,’ said Nirupama. ‘Do
you think I have no honour? Do you think I am just a money-bag, the
more money in it the higher my value? No, Father, don’t shame me by
paying this money. My husband doesn’t want it anyway.’

‘But then they won’t let you come and see me,’ said Ramsundar.

‘That can’t be helped,’ said Nirupama. ‘Please don’t try to fetch me
any more.’

Ramsundar tremblingly pulled his chadar – with the money tied into
it – back round his shoulders, and left the house like a thief again,
avoiding everyone’s stare.

It did not, however, remain a secret that Ramsundar had come with
the money and that his daughter had forbidden him to hand it over. An
inquisitive servant, a listener at keyholes, passed the information on to
Nirupama’s mother-in-law, whose malice towards her daughter-in-law
now went beyond all limits. The household became a bed of nails for
her. Her husband had gone off a few days after their wedding to be
Deputy Magistrate in another part of the country. Claiming that
Nirupama would be corrupted by contact with her relatives, her in-laws
now completely forbade her from seeing them.

She now fell seriously ill. But this was not wholly her mother-in-law’s
fault. She herself had neglected her health dreadfully. On chilly autumn
nights she lay with her head near the open door, and she wore no extra
clothes during the winter. She ate irregularly. The servants would
sometimes forget to bring her any food: she would not then say anything
to remind them. She was forming a fixed belief that she was herself a
servant in the household, dependent on the favours of her master and
mistress. But her mother-in-law could not stand even this attitude. If
Nirupama showed lack of interest in food, she would say, ‘What a
princess she is! A poor household’s fare is not to her liking!’ Or else she
would say, ‘Look at her. What a beauty! She’s more and more like a
piece of burnt wood.’

When her illness got worse, her mother-in-law said, ‘It’s all put on.’
Finally one day Nirupama said humbly, ‘Let me see my father and
brothers just once, Mother.’

‘Nothing but a trick to get to her father’s house,’ said her mother-inlaw.
It may seem unbelievable, but the evening when Nirupama’s breath
began to fail was when the doctor was first called, and it was the last
visit that he made too.

The eldest daughter-in-law in the household had died, and the funeral
rites were performed with appropriate pomp. The Raychaudhuris were
renowned in the district for the lavishness with which they performed
the immersion of the deity at the end of Durgā-pūjā, but the
Raybahadur’s family became famous for the way Nirupama was
cremated: such a huge sandalwood pyre had never been seen. Only they
could have managed such elaborate rites, and it was rumoured that they
got rather into debt as a result.

Everyone gave Ramsundar long descriptions of the magnificence of his
daughter’s death, when they came to condole with him. Meanwhile a
letter from the Deputy Magistrate arrived: ‘I have made all necessary
arrangements here, so please send my wife to me quickly.’ The
Raybahadur’s wife replied, ‘Dear son, we have secured another girl for
you, so please take leave soon and come home.’

This time the dowry was 20,000 rupees, cash down.
