When the brothers Dukhiram Rui and Chidam Rui went out in the
morning with their heavy farm-knives, to work in the fields, their wives
were already quarrelling and shouting. But the people near by were as
used to the uproar as they were to other customary, natural sounds. As
soon as they heard the shrill screams of the women, they would say,
‘They’re at it again’ – that is, what was happening was only to be
expected: it was not a violation of Nature’s rules. When the sun rises at
dawn, no one asks why; and whenever the two wives in this kuri-caste
household let fly at each other, no one was at all curious to investigate
the cause.

Of course this wrangling and disturbance affected the husbands more
than the neighbours, but they did not count it a major nuisance. It was
as if they were riding together along life’s road in a cart whose rattling,
clattering, unsprung wheels were inseparable from the journey. Indeed,
days when there was no noise, when everything was uncannily silent,
carried a greater threat of unpredictable doom.

The day on which our story begins was like this. When the brothers
returned home at dusk, exhausted by their work, they found the house
eerily quiet. Outside, too, it was extremely sultry. There had been a
sharp shower in the afternoon, and clouds were still massing. There was
not a breath of wind. Weeds and scrub round the house had shot up after
the rain: the heavy scent of damp vegetation, from these and from the
waterlogged jute-fields, formed a solid wall all around. Frogs croaked
from the pond behind the cowshed, and the buzz of crickets filled the
leaden sky.

Not far off the swollen Padma looked flat and sinister under the
mounting clouds. It had flooded most of the grain-fields, and had come
close to the houses. Here and there, roots of mango and jackfruit trees
on the slipping bank stuck up out of the water, like helpless hands
clawing at the void for a last fingerhold.

That day, Dukhiram and Chidam had been working at the zamindar’s
office-building. On the sandbanks opposite, paddy had ripened. The
paddy needed to be cut before the sandbanks were washed away; the
poorest villagers were busy there either in their own fields or in other
people’s fields; but a bailiff had come from the office and forcibly
engaged the two brothers. As the office roof was leaking in places, they
had to mend that and make some new wickerwork panels: it had taken
them all day. They couldn’t come home for lunch; they just had a snack
from the office. At times they were soaked by the rain; they were not
paid normal labourers’ wages; indeed, they were paid mainly in insults
and sneers.

When the two brothers returned at dusk, wading through mud and
water, they found the younger wife, Chandara, stretched on the ground
with her sari spread out. Like the sky, she had wept buckets in the
afternoon, but had now given way to sultry exhaustion. The elder wife,
Radha, sat on the verandah sullenly: her eighteen-month son had been
crying, but when the brothers came in they saw him lying naked in a
corner of the yard, asleep.

Dukhiram, famished, said gruffly, ‘Give me my food.’

Like a spark on a sack of gunpowder, the elder wife exploded,
shrieking out, ‘Where is there food? Did you give me anything to cook?
Must I walk the streets to earn it?’

After a whole day of toil and humiliation, to return – raging with
hunger – to a dark, joyless, foodless house, to be met by Radha’s
sarcasm, and especially by that last insinuation, was suddenly
unendurable. ‘What?’ he roared, like a furious tiger, and then, without
thinking, plunged his knife into her head. Radha collapsed into her
sister-in-law’s lap, and in minutes she was dead.

‘What have you done?’ screamed Chandara, her clothes soaked with
blood. Chidam pressed his hand over her mouth. Dukhiram, letting the
knife drop, fell to his knees with his head in his hands, stunned. The
little boy woke up and started to wail in terror.

Outside there was complete quiet. The herd-boys were returning with
the cattle. Those who had been cutting paddy on the opposite side of the
river were crossing back five or six to a boat, with a couple of bundles of
paddy on their heads as payment, and were now nearly all home.

Ramlochan Chakrabarti, pillar of the village, had been to the post office
with a letter, and was now back in his house, placidly smoking.
Suddenly he remembered that his sub-tenant Dukhiram was very behind
with his rent: he had promised to pay some today. Deciding that the
brothers must be home by now, he threw his chadar over his shoulders,
took his umbrella, and stepped out.

As he entered the Ruis’ house, he felt uneasy. There was no lamp
alight. On the dark verandah, the dim shapes of three or four people
could be seen. In a corner of the verandah there were fitful, muffled
sobs: the little boy was trying to cry for his mother, but was stopped
each time by Chidam.

‘Dukhi,’ said Ramlochan nervously, ‘are you there?’

Dukhiram had been sitting like a statue for a long time; now, on
hearing his name, he burst into tears like a helpless child.

Chidam quickly came down from the verandah into the yard, to meet
Ramlochan. ‘Have the women been quarrelling again?’ Ramlochan
asked. ‘I heard them yelling all day.’

Chidam, all this time, had been unable to think what to do. Various
impossible stories occurred to him. All he had decided was that later that
night he would move the body somewhere. He had never expected
Ramlochan to come. He could think of no swift reply. ‘Yes,’ he stumbled,
‘today they were quarrelling terribly.’

‘But why is Dukhi crying so?’ asked Ramlochan, stepping towards the
verandah.

Seeing no way out now, Chidam blurted, ‘In their quarrel, Choṭobau
struck at Baṛobau’s head with a farm-knife.’

When immediate danger threatens, it is hard to think of other
dangers. Chidam’s only thought was of how to escape from the terrible
truth – he forgot that a lie can be even more terrible. A reply to
Ramlochan’s question had come instantly to mind, and he had blurted it
out.

‘Good grief,’ said Ramlochan in horror. ‘What are you saying? Is she
dead?’

‘She’s dead,’ said Chidam, clasping Ramlochan’s feet.

Ramlochan was trapped. ‘Rām, Rām,’ he thought, ‘what a mess I’ve got
into this evening. What if I have to be a witness in court?’ Chidam was
still clinging to his feet, saying, ‘Thākur, how can I save my wife?’

Ramlochan was the village’s chief source of advice on legal matters.
Reflecting further he said, ‘I think I know a way. Run to the police
station: say that your brother Dukhi returned in the evening wanting his
food, and because it wasn’t ready he struck his wife on the head with his
knife. I’m sure that if you say that, she’ll get off.’

Chidam felt a sickening dryness in his throat. He stood up and said,
‘Thākur, if I lose my wife I can get another, but if my brother is hanged,
how can I replace him?’ In laying the blame on his wife, he had not seen
it that way. He had spoken without thought; now, imperceptibly,
arguments that would serve his own interest were forming in his mind.

Ramlochan took the point. ‘Then say what actually happened,’ he
said. ‘You can’t protect yourself on all sides.’

In no time after he had hurried away, the news spread round the
village that Chandara Rui had, in a quarrel with her sister-in-law, split
her head open with a farm-knife. Police charged into the village like a
river in flood. Both the guilty and the innocent were equally afraid.

II
Chidam decided he would have to stick to the path he had chalked out
for himself. The story he had given to Ramlochan Chakrabarti had gone
all round the village; who knew what would happen if another story was
circulated? But he realized that if he kept to the story he would have to
wrap it in five more stories if his wife was to be saved.

Chidam asked Chandara to take the blame on to herself. She was
dumbfounded. He reassured her: ‘Don’t worry – if you do what I tell you,
you’ll be quite safe.’ But whatever his words, his throat was dry and his
face was pale.

Chandara was not more than seventeen or eighteen. She was buxom,
well-rounded, compact and sturdy – so trim in her movements that in
walking, turning, bending or squatting there was no awkwardness at all.
She was like a brand-new boat: neat and shapely, gliding with ease, not
a loose joint anywhere. Everything amused and intrigued her; she loved
to gossip; her bright, restless, deep black eyes missed nothing as she
walked to the ghāṭ, pitcher on her hip, parting her veil slightly with her
finger.

The elder wife had been her exact opposite: unkempt, sloppy and
slovenly. She was utterly disorganized in her dress, housework, and the
care of her child. She never had any proper work in hand, yet never
seemed to have time for anything. The younger wife usually refrained
from comment, for at the mildest barb Radha would rage and stamp and
let fly at her, disturbing everyone around.

Each wife was matched by her husband to an extraordinary degree.
Dukhiram was a huge man – his bones were immense, his nose was
squat, in his eyes and expression he seemed not to understand the world
very well, yet he never questioned it either. He was innocent yet
fearsome: a rare combination of power and helplessness. Chidam,
however, seemed to have been carefully carved from shiny black rock.
There was not an inch of excess fat on him, not a wrinkle or pock-mark
anywhere. Each limb was a perfect blend of strength and finesse.
Whether jumping from a river-bank, or punting a boat, or climbing up
bamboo-shoots for sticks, he showed complete dexterity, effortless grace.
His long black hair was combed with oil back from his brow and down
to his shoulders – he took great care over his dress and appearance.
Although he was not unresponsive to the beauty of other women in the
village, and was keen to make himself charming in their eyes, his real
love was for his young wife. They quarrelled sometimes, but always
made peace again, for neither could defeat the other. There was a
further reason why the bond between them was firm: Chidam felt that a
wife as nimble and sharp as Chandara could not be wholly trusted, and
Chandara felt that her husband had roving eyes – that if she didn’t keep
him on a tight rein he might go astray.

A little before the events in this story, however, they had a major row.
Chandara found that her husband used work as an excuse for travelling
far and for staying extra days away, yet brought no earnings home.
Finding this ominous, she too began to overstep the mark. She kept
going to the ghāṭ, and returned from wandering round the village with
rather too much to say about Kashi Majumdar’s middle son.

Something now seemed to poison Chidam’s life. He could not settle
his attention on his work. One day he bitterly rebuked his sister-in-law,
laying the blame on her: she threw up her hands and said in the name of
her dead father, ‘That girl runs before the storm. How can I restrain her?
Who knows what ruin she will bring?’

Chandara came out of the next room and said sweetly, ‘What’s the
matter, Didi?’ and a fierce quarrel broke out between them.

Chidam glared at his wife and said, ‘If I ever hear that you’ve been to
the ghāṭ on your own, I’ll break every bone in your body.’

‘That would be a blessed release,’ said Chandara, starting to leave.
Chidam sprang at her, grabbed her by the hair, dragged her back to the
room and locked her in.

When he returned from work that evening he found the doors open,
the house empty. Chandara had fled three villages away, to her maternal
uncle’s house. With great difficulty Chidam persuaded her to return, but
now he had to give in. It was as hard to restrain his wife as to hold a
handful of mercury; she always slipped through his fingers. He did not
use force any more, but there was no peace in the house. Ever-fearful
love for his elusive young wife wracked him with intense pain. He even
once or twice wondered if it would be better if she were dead: at least he
would get some peace then. Human beings can hate each other more
than death.

It was at this time that the crisis hit the house.

When her husband asked her to admit to the murder, Chandara stared at
him, stunned; her black eyes burnt him like fire. Then she slowly shrank
from him, as if to escape his devilish clutches. She turned her heart and
soul quite away. ‘You’ve nothing to fear,’ said Chidam. He taught her
repeatedly what she should say to the police and the magistrate.
Chandara paid no attention – sat like a wooden idol whenever he spoke.

Dukhiram relied on Chidam for everything. When he told him to lay
the blame on Chandara, Dukhiram asked, ‘But what will happen to her?’
‘I’ll save her,’ said Chidam. His burly brother was content with that.

III
This was what Chidam instructed his wife to say: ‘The elder wife was
about to attack me with the vegetable-slicer. I picked up a farm-knife to
stop her, and it somehow cut into her.’ This was all Ramlochan’s
invention. He had generously supplied Chidam with the proofs and
embroidery that the story would require.

The police came to investigate. The villagers were sure now that
Chandara had murdered her sister-in-law, and all the witnesses
confirmed this. When the police questioned Chandara, she said, ‘Yes, I
killed her.’

‘Why did you kill her?’

‘I couldn’t stand her any more.’

‘Was there a brawl between you?’

‘No.’

‘Did she attack you first?’

‘No.’

‘Did she ill-treat you?’

‘No.’

Everyone was amazed at these replies, and Chidam was completely
thrown off balance. ‘She’s not telling the truth,’ he said. ‘The elder wife
first –’

The inspector silenced him sharply. Subjecting Chandara to a
thorough cross-examination, he repeatedly received the same reply:
Chandara would not accept that she had been attacked in any way by
her sister-in-law. Such an obstinate girl was never seen! She seemed
absolutely bent on going to the gallows; nothing would stop her. Such
fierce, disastrous pride!1 In her thoughts, Chandara was saying to her
husband, ‘I shall give my youth to the gallows instead of to you. My final
ties in this life will be with them.’

Chandara was arrested, and left her home for ever, by the paths she
knew so well, past the festival carriage, the market-place, the ghāt, the
Majumdars’ house, the post office, the school – an ordinary, harmless,
flirtatious, fun-loving village wife; carrying a stigma that could never be
obliterated. A bevy of boys followed her, and the women of the village,
her friends and companions – some of them peering through their veils,
some from their doorsteps, some from behind trees – watched the police
leading her away and shuddered with embarrassment, fear and
contempt.

To the Deputy Magistrate, Chandara again confessed her guilt,
claiming no ill-treatment from her sister-in-law at the time of the
murder. But when Chidam was called to the witness-box he broke down
completely, weeping, clasping his hands and saying, ‘I swear to you, sir,
my wife is innocent.’ The magistrate sternly told him to control himself,
and began to question him. Bit by bit the true story came out.

The magistrate did not believe him, because the chief, most
respectable, most educated witness – Ramlochan Chakrabarti – said: ‘I
appeared on the scene a little after the murder. Chidam confessed
everything to me and clung to my feet saying, “Tell me how I can save
my wife.” I did not say anything one way or the other. Then Chidam
said, “If I say that my elder brother killed his wife in a fit of fury because
his food wasn’t ready, will she get off?” I said, “Be careful, you rogue:
don’t say a single false word in court – there’s no worse offence than
that.” ’ Ramlochan had previously prepared lots of stories that would
save Chandara, but when he found that she herself was bending her neck
to receive the noose, he decided, ‘Why the hell should I run the risk of
giving false evidence now? I’d better say what little I know.’ So
Ramlochan said what he knew – or rather said a little more than he
knew.

The Deputy Magistrate committed the case to a sessions trial.
Meanwhile in fields, houses, markets and bazaars, the mirth and grief of
the world carried on; and just as in previous years, torrential monsoon
rains fell on to the new rice-crop.

Police, defendant and witnesses were all in court. In the civil court
opposite hordes of people were waiting for their cases. A Calcutta lawyer
had come on a suit about the sharing of a pond behind a kitchen; the
plaintiff had thirty-nine witnesses. Hundreds of people were anxiously
waiting for hair-splitting judgements, certain that nothing, at present,
was more important. Chidam stared out of the window at the constant
throng, and it seemed like a dream. A koel-bird was hooting from a huge
banyan tree in the compound: no courts or cases in his world!

Chandara said to the judge, ‘Sir, how many times must I go on saying
the same thing?’

The judge explained, ‘Do you know the penalty for the crime you have
confessed?’

‘No,’ said Chandara.

‘It is death by the hanging.’

‘Then please, please give it to me, sir,’ said Chandara. ‘Do what you
like – I can’t take any more.’

When her husband was called to the court, she turned away. ‘Look at
the witness,’ said the judge, ‘and say who he is.’

‘He is my husband,’ said Chandara, covering her face with her hands.

‘Does he not love you?’

‘Like crazy.’

‘Do you not love him?’

‘Madly.’

When Chidam was questioned, he said, ‘I killed her.

‘Why?’

‘I wanted my food and my sister-in-law didn’t give it to me.’
When Dukhiram came to give evidence, he fainted. When he had
come round again, he answered, ‘Sir, I killed her.’

‘Why?’

‘I wanted a meal and she didn’t give it to me.’

After extensive cross-examination of various other witnesses, the
judge concluded that the brothers had confessed to the crime in order to
save the younger wife from the shame of the noose. But Chandara had,
from the police investigation right through to the sessions trial, said the
same thing repeatedly – she had not budged an inch from her story. Two
barristers, of their own volition, did their utmost to save her from the
death-sentence, but in the end were defeated by her.

Who, on that auspicious night when, at a very young age, a dusky,
diminutive, round-faced girl had left her childhood dolls in her father’s
house and come to her in-laws’ house, could have imagined these
events? Her father, on his deathbed, had happily reflected that at least
he had made proper arrangements for his daughter’s future.

In gaol, just before the hanging, a kindly Civil Surgeon asked
Chandara, ‘Do you want to see anyone?’

‘I’d like to see my mother,’ she replied.

‘Shall I call your husband?’ asked the doctor. ‘He wants to see you.’

‘To hell with him,’1 said Chandara.

