There was a whole skeleton hanging on the wall of the room next to the
one where the three of us slept when we were young. At night the bones
used to clatter as the breeze stirred them. During the day we ourselves
had to stir them: we were, at that time, studying meghnād-badh kābya
with a pundit, and anatomy with a student from the Campbell Medical
School. Our guardian wanted us to become instant experts in all fields of
learning. To reveal how far his wishes were fulfilled would be
superfluous to those who know us and unwise to those who do not.

This was all a long time ago. Meanwhile the skeleton disappeared
from the room, and anatomical knowledge from our heads – heaven
knows where.

A few days ago there was, for some reason, a shortage of space in the
house and I had to spend the night in the room. Unused to being there, I
couldn’t sleep. I tossed and turned, and heard the big bell of the church
clock nearly every time it struck. The oil-lamp in the corner of the room
guttered, and five minutes later went out completely. Recently there had
been a couple of deaths in our household – so the extinction of the lamp
easily aroused morbid thoughts. The flame of a lamp could fade into
eternal darkness at one in the morning; the little flame of a man’s life
could also go out one day or night and be forgotten. Gradually the
memory of the skeleton came to me. As I imagined the life of the person
whose skeleton it was, I suddenly felt a kind of live presence groping
along the wall and circling round my mosquito-net, breathing audibly. It
seemed to be looking for something, pacing rapidly round the room as it
failed to find it. I knew perfectly well that this was all fabricated by my
sleepless overheated brain: it was the blood throbbing in my head that
sounded like rapid footsteps. Nevertheless, I felt very odd. Trying to
break out of my senseless fear, I called, ‘Who’s there?’ The footsteps
stopped right next to my mosquito-net and I heard an answer: ‘Me. I’ve
come to see where my skeleton might have gone.’

I decided I really could not show such fear to a creature of my
imagination; so, clutching my pillow grimly, I said in a cheery voice as if
speaking to an old friend, ‘The right sort of task for the middle of the
night! You still need that skeleton?’

From the darkness right against the mosquito-net the reply came,
‘How could I not? My breast-bone was part of it – my twenty-six-yearold 
youth flowered around it. How could I not wish to see it again?’

‘I understand what you mean,’ I replied hastily. ‘Finish searching and
then go. I’m trying to get some sleep.’

‘You’re alone, I see,’ said the voice. ‘Then let me sit down a little. Let
me talk to you. Thirty-five years ago I too sat next to men and chatted
with them. For thirty-five years I have wandered about, moaning with
the wind of cremation-grounds. Today I want to sit next to you and talk
like a human being again.’

I sensed that someone had sat down next to my mosquito-net. Seeing
no way out, I said brightly, ‘Fine. Talk about whatever would make you
feel better.’

‘The most amusing story I have,’ she said, ‘is the story of my life.’

The church clock struck two.

‘When I was alive and young there was someone I feared like death. My
husband. I felt like a fish caught on a hook. That is, a completely
unknown animal had hauled me up on a hook, snatched me out of the
cool, deep, protective waters of my home, with no chance of escape.
Two months after my marriage, my husband died. The grief that was
expected of me was supplied in full by my in-laws. My father-in-law,
pointing to numerous signs, told my mother-in-law that I was what the
Shastras called a “poison-bride”. I remember that distinctly. Are you
listening? Are you enjoying the story?’

‘Very much,’ I said. ‘It’s very amusing so far.’

‘Then listen. I returned joyfully to my father’s house. I grew up.
People tried to disguise it from me, but I well knew that women as
beautiful as I was are rare. Do you agree?’

‘Quite possibly. But I have never seen you.’

‘Never seen me? Why? You saw my skeleton! But I mustn’t tease you.
How can I prove to you that in those empty eye-sockets there were big,
wide, black eyes; that the skeleton’s hideous toothy grin bore no
comparison with the sweet smile that played on my red lips? It would be
both amusing and annoying to describe to you the grace, the youth, the
firm unblemished fullness that ripened day by day on those long dry
pieces of bone! The anatomy of that body of mine was beyond even the
greatest doctors! Indeed a doctor once said to his best friend that I was a
“golden lotus”; meaning that anatomy and physiology could be learnt
from any other human body, but I was unique – a miraculous flower.
Does a golden lotus have a skeleton inside? When I moved, I knew that I
was like a diamond sparkling in all directions when you turn it – such
waves of natural beauty broke forth on all sides with my every gesture. I
would sometimes gaze at my arms – arms that could have sweetly
subdued the world’s most passionate men like a horse’s bridle. Do you
remember Subhadra when she scooped up Arjuna and proudly drove
him in her chariot astonishing heaven, earth and the nether world?
Equal to hers were those delicate, shapely arms of mine, those pink
palms, those beautifully tapered fingers. But that shameless, naked,
unadorned skeleton bore false witness to me. I was speechless and
helpless then, and angrier with you than anyone else in the world. I
longed to stand before you as I was at sixteen, in the living, youthful
flush of my beauty; to rob you of sleep; to disrupt your anatomy-learning
and drive it away.’

‘If you had a body,’ I said, ‘I would touch it and swear that not a trace
of that learning remains in my mind. Your world-enchanting youthful
beauty is all I am aware of now, radiantly etched against the night’s dark
background – nothing but that!’

‘I had no female friend to keep me company. My elder brother had
resolved not to get married. There were no other women in the house. I
used to sit under a tree in the garden and imagine that the whole of
Nature was in love with me, that all the stars were eyeing me, that the
wind was sidling past me sighing deeply, that the grass on which my legs
were stretched out would, were it conscious, quickly swoon to
unconsciousness again. I supposed that all the world’s young men were
silently assembled round my feet like a clump of grass. What senseless
anguish I felt!

‘When my brother’s friend Shashishekhar passed out of medical
college, he became our family doctor. I had previously often observed
him secretly. My brother was a very peculiar person – he seemed never
to look at the world with his eyes open: as if there were never enough
space in the world for him, and he therefore had to retreat to the
outermost edge of it. Shashishekhar was his only friend, so of all the
young men outside he was the one I watched most often. And when in
the evening I sat like an empress at the foot of my flowering tree, all the
world’s young men sat at my feet in Shashishekhar’s image. Are you
listening? What are you thinking?’

‘I’m thinking,’ I said with a sigh, ‘that I should have liked to have been
born as Shashishekhar.’

‘Listen to the whole story first. One day in the rainy season I caught a
fever. The doctor came to see me. It was our first meeting. I turned my
face towards the window, so that the red light of evening might mask
my pallor. When the doctor came into the room and looked at my face, I
imagined that I myself was the doctor looking at my face. In the evening
light it was as delicate as a slightly wilted flower laid on a soft pillow;
unkempt strands of hair had fallen on to my forehead, and my shyly
lowered eyelashes cast shadows on to my cheeks. The doctor, speaking
in a low, gentle voice, told my brother he would need to feel my pulse. I
slid my rounded, listless arm out from underneath the coverings.
Glancing at it, I reflected that it would have looked better with blue
glass-bangles on it. As the doctor felt my sickly pulse, he was more
unsettled than any doctor I had known. His fingers trembled most
incompetently. He could feel the heat of my fever; I also had a sense of
how his own pulse was racing. Don’t you believe me?’

‘I don’t see any reason for disbelieving you,’ I said. ‘A man’s pulse
varies according to circumstances.’

‘Gradually, after three or four more periods of illness and recovery, I
found that at my imaginary evening court the millions of men in the
world had reduced themselves to one. My world was almost deserted – a
single doctor and a single patient were all that were left. I would
surreptitiously put on a light-orange-coloured sari, plait a string 
of belflowers into my hair, and sit in the garden with a mirror in my hand.
Why? For the pleasure one gets from looking at oneself? But in fact I was
not looking at myself, for it was not I who did so. I had become two
people, as I sat alone. I saw myself as the doctor saw me; I loved and
worshipped and was enraptured; yet within me deep sighs heaved like
the moaning evening wind.

‘From that time on I was no longer alone. When I walked, casting my
eyes down to look at the way my toes pressed the ground, I wondered
how our newly qualified doctor would like my footsteps; in the
afternoon, when the heat shimmered outside the window, and there was
no sound except the cry of a kite flying high in the sky or toy-sellers
outside our garden-fence calling, “Toys for sale, bangles for sale”, I
would spread out a clean sheet and lie down. I would stretch a naked
arm casually across my soft bed and pretend that a certain someone had
seen my arm and the way I stretched it out, had lifted it up in both
hands, had planted a kiss on my pink palm and had crept out again.
What would you think of the story if it ended here?’

‘Not bad,’ I replied. ‘Still a bit incomplete – but I would happily spend
the rest of the night finishing it off in my mind.’

‘But it would be a very serious story then! What about the ironic twist
at the end? What about the skeleton within, with all its teeth showing?
Listen to what happened next. The doctor’s practice built up, and he was
able to open a small surgery on the ground floor of our house. I would
sometimes jokingly ask him about medicines, poisons, what would make
a man die quickly, and so on. The doctor spoke freely about his
profession. As I listened, Death became as familiar as a relative. Love
and Death were the only things that were real to me.

‘My story is almost finished – there is not much more of it.’

‘And the night is almost over too,’ I murmured.

‘After a while I noticed that the doctor had become distracted,
seemingly embarrassed in my company. Then one day I saw him all
dressed up, asking if he could borrow my brother’s carriage – he was
going somewhere that night. I could not bear to remain in ignorance. I
went to my brother and eventually managed to ask, “Tell me, Dādā,
where is the doctor going to tonight in the carriage?”

‘ “To die,” said my brother laconically.

‘ “No, tell me truly,” I said.

‘ “To get married,” he said, more openly than before.

“You don’t say!” I said, laughing loudly.

‘Bit by bit I discovered that the doctor would get 12,000 rupees from
the marriage. But what was his purpose in shaming me by keeping his
plans secret? Had I fallen at his feet and told him I would die of 
heartbreak if he married? Men can never be trusted. I learnt this in one fell
swoop, from the only man I cared about in the world.

‘Just before dusk, when the doctor came into the room after seeing his
patients, I laughed raucously and said, “Well, Doctor – so today you’re
getting married?”

‘The doctor was not only embarrassed at my frankness, he became
extremely glum.

‘ “Isn’t there going to be any band or music?” I asked.

‘ “Is marrying a matter for such rejoicing?” he said with a slight sigh.

‘I became quite overcome with laughter. I had never heard such a
thing. “That won’t do,” I said. “There must be a band, there must be
lights.”

‘I got my brother so worked up that he immediately set about
organizing festivities on a grand scale. I chatted on about what would
happen when the bride came into the house, what I would do. I asked,
“Well, Doctor – will you go around feeling lady-patients’ pulses now?”
Although human thoughts, especially a man’s thoughts, cannot be
directly perceived, I can nevertheless swear that my words struck the
doctor like a spear in the chest.

‘The ceremony was fixed for the middle of the night. That evening the
doctor sat out on the roof with my brother drinking a glass or two of
liquor. It was their habit to do this. The moon rose slowly in the sky. I
went to them and said, still laughing, “Has the Doctor Babu forgotten?
The show is about to start!”

A minor detail here: I had, beforehand, gone secretly into the doctor’s
surgery to collect some powder, and had taken my chance to mix a small
part of it into the doctor’s glass, unseen by anyone. I had learnt from the
doctor which powders were fatal. The doctor swallowed the drink in one
gulp, and looking at me piteously said in a slightly choked and husky
voice, “I must be off now.”

‘Flute-music began to play. I put on a Benares sari, and all the
ornaments from my jewellery-chest; and I smeared vermilion liberally
into my parting. Then I spread out my bedding under my favourite bakul
tree. It was a beautiful night. Full, pure moonlight. A south wind blew
away the tiredness of a sleeping world. The whole garden was fragrant
with bel-blossoms and jasmine. When the sound of the flute had faded
into the distance; when the moonlight had begun to fade, and the whole
world around me – trees, sky, my life-long home – seemed unreal, I
closed my eyes and smiled.

‘My wish was that when people came and found me, that slight smile
would still be intoxicatingly present on my red lips. My wish was that
when I slowly entered my bridal-chamber of Eternal Night, I would take
that smile with me. But where was the bridal-chamber? Where was my
bridal attire? Woken by a clattering sound within me, I found three boys
learning anatomy from me. In a breast that had throbbed with joy and
sorrow, where, daily, the petals of youth had unfolded one by one, a
teacher was pointing out with his cane which bone was which. And what
trace was there now of the final smile I had formed with my lips?’

‘How did you find my story?’

‘Hilarious,’ I replied.

The first crow cawed. ‘Are you still there?’ I asked.

There was no reply. Dawn-light was entering the room.

