Baidyanath was the shrewdest man in the village, and he always did
everything with an eye to the future. When he married, he had a clearer
vision of the son he hoped for than of the bride in front of him. So 
farsighted a look at the moment of the first unveiling has rarely been seen.
He knew what he was about, and was therefore more concerned with the
offering of oblations after his death than he was with love. ‘One gets a
wife to have a son’: it was in this spirit that he married Binoda.

But even shrewd people can be cheated in this world. Though ripe for
child-bearing, Binoda failed in her chief duty, and Baidyanath grew very
alarmed when he saw the open gates of punnām-narak – the hell to
which men without sons are condemned. Worried about who would
inherit his wealth when he died, it became less of a pleasure to him now.
As I have said, the future was more real to him than the present.

But how could one expect the youthful Binoda to look so far ahead?
For her, poor girl, the worst thing was that her precious present life was
being wasted: her budding youth was withering away through lack of
love. The hunger of her heart in this world burned too strongly for her to
care about the hunger of the spirit in the next. The Holy Laws of Manu,
and her husband’s psychical exposition of them, gave no relief to her
craving.

Say what one may, at this age a woman finds her every joy in giving
and receiving love, and has a natural tendency to value it more than
duty. But instead of the delicate showers of new love, Fate decreed a
stinging, roaring hailstorm, poured down by her husband and his lofty
family hierarchy. They all accused her of being barren. Her wasted
youth wilted, like a flowering plant kept indoors away from light and
air.

Whenever she could bear the scolding and repression no longer, she
would go to Kusum’s house to play cards. She enjoyed this greatly. The
terrible shadow of damnation lifted for a while, and jokes and laughter
and chatter flowed freely. On days when Kusum had no female partner
for the game, she would call in her young brother-in-law Nagendra,
brushing aside any objection that either he or Binoda might make. Older
people know how one thing can lead to another, how a game can
become something more serious; but the young are not so aware of this.
Nagendra’s objections faded: soon he could hardly bear to wait for each
card-playing session.

It thus happened that Binoda and Nagendra started to meet each other
often, and he often now lost the game, because his eyes and mind were
on something more vital than cards. Kusum and Binoda were both well
aware of this (the real reason why he lost). As I have said, the young do
not understand the consequences of their actions. Kusum found it highly
amusing, and avidly watched the joke unfold. Young women delight in
secretly watering the seeds of love.

Neither was Binoda unwilling. For a woman to wish to sharpen her
weapons of conquest on a man may be wrong, but it is not unnatural. So
as the games were won and lost and the cards were shuffled and dealt,
the minds of two of the players came together in a way that only one
other (apart from God) saw – and enjoyed.

One day at noon Binoda, Kusum and Nagendra were playing cards.
After a while Kusum heard her young child (who was ill) crying, and
went out of the room. Nagendra kept on chatting to Binoda, but he had
no idea what he was saying: his heart galloped, and his blood surged
through every vessel in his body. Suddenly youthful passion broke
through the barriers of modesty: he seized Binoda’s arms, wrenched her
towards him, and kissed her. Shocked, angered, wounded, flustered by
this affront, Binoda struggled to get free – but suddenly they noticed a
third person in the room, a servant-woman. Nagendra looked at the
ground, searching for an escape-route.

‘Bauthākrun,’ said the woman in a grim voice, ‘your aunt is calling for
you.’ Tearfully, and with flashing glances at Nagendra, Binoda went out
with her.

The servant-woman soon raised a storm in Baidyanath’s house,
making light of what she had seen but greatly elaborating what she had
not. The plight that Binoda fell into is easier to imagine than to describe.
She did not try to defend her innocence to anyone; she merely bowed
her head.

Baidyanath, deciding that his chance of a son by her to offer funerary
oblations was now extremely remote, turned on her with the words:
‘Slut! Get out of my house.’

Binoda shut the door of her bedroom and lay on the bed, her tearless
eyes blazing like a desert in the afternoon. When it was dark, and the
crows in the garden stopped cawing, she looked up into the peaceful,
star-studded sky and thought of her mother and father; only then did
tears start to trickle down her cheeks.

That night, she left her husband’s house. No one tried to find her. She
did not know at that time that she had attained ‘woman’s greatest
fortune’: that her husband’s salvation in the next world was secure in her
womb.

Ten years passed, during which Baidyanath grew wealthier and
wealthier. He had now left the village and bought a large house in
Calcutta. But the more his wealth increased, the more anxious he
became about who would inherit it.

He made two more marriages, each of which led only to dissension,
not to a son. Soothsayers, healers and holy men filled his house: a stream
of roots, amulets, magic waters and patent medicines. If the bones of all
the goats he sacrificed at Kalighat had been piled high, they would have
dwarfed Tamburlaine’s victory-tower of skulls. But not even the tiniest of
babies – not even the tiniest bundle of bones and flesh – arrived to
inherit a corner of Baidyanath’s palatial estate. He could hardly eat for
worry about whose son it would be who would feed off his substance
after his death.

Baidyanath married yet again, because human hope has no limits, and
there is no shortage of parents with daughters to dispose of. Astrologers
examined the girl’s horoscope and pronounced that the auspicious
conjunctions therein were such that Baidyanath’s household would
quickly increase its numbers; but six years went by in which those
conjunctions failed to become active.

Baidyanath sank into despair. Finally, on the advice of pundits learned
in the Shastras, he prepared an enormously costly fertility rite.1 Scores of
Brahmins were fed in connection with it.

Meanwhile, widespread famine was reducing Bengal, Bihar and Orissa
to skin and bones. While Baidyanath sat amidst his abundant supplies
and worried about who would one day eat them, an entire famished
country looked at its empty platter and wondered what it would eat.

For four months Baidyanath’s fourth wife drank water in which a
hundred Brahmins had bathed their feet; and a hundred Brahmins,
eating gross lunches and monstrous suppers, filled the municipal
rubbish-carts with discarded earthenware cups and plates and 
bananaleaves smeared with curd and ghee. At the smell of the food, starving
people crowded round the doors. Extra guards were employed to drive
them away.

One morning, in Baidyanath’s marble mansion, a pot-bellied sannyāsi
was being served with two seers of mohanbhog and one-and-a-half seers
of milk; and Baidyanath was watching this holy meal, sitting on the
ground humbly and piously, hands clasped, chadar over his shoulder. An
extremely thin woman with her emaciated child entered the room – she
had somehow evaded the guards – and said piteously, ‘Babu, give us a
bite to eat.’

Baidyanath, in a flurry, shouted for his servant, ‘Gurudoyal,
Gurudoyal!’ Fearing the worst, the woman said pathetically, ‘Can’t you
give the child something? I don’t want anything.’

Gurudoyal came and chased off the woman and her little boy. That
starving unfed boy was Baidyanath’s only son. A hundred well-nourished
Brahmins and three stout sannyāsīs, enticing Baidyanath with the faint
prospect of a son, went on guzzling his supplies.

