RABINDRANATH TAGORE: SELECTED SHORT STORIES
RABINDRANATH TAGORE was born in 1861, into one of the foremost families

of Bengal. He was the fourteenth child of Debendranath Tagore, who
headed the Brahmo Samaj (a Hindu reform movement). The family
house at Jorasanko in Calcutta was a hive of cultural and intellectual
activity. Tagore was educated by private tutors, and first visited Europe
in 1878. He started writing at an early age, and his talent was
recognized by Bankimchandra Chatterjee, the leading writer of the day.
In the 1890s Tagore lived mainly in rural East Bengal, managing family
estates. In the early 1900s he was involved in the svadeśī campaign
against the British, but withdrew when the movement turned violent. In
1912 he came to England with Gitanjali, an English translation of some
of his religious lyrics. It was acclaimed by W. B. Yeats and later
published by Macmillan, leading directly to his winning the Nobel Prize
for Literature in 1913. In the 1920s and 1930s he made extensive lecture
tours of America, Europe and the Far East. Proceeds from these tours,
and from his Western publications, went to Visva-Bharati, the school and
international university he created at Santiniketan, a hundred miles
north-west of Calcutta.
Tagore was a controversial figure at home and abroad: at home
because of his ceaseless innovations in poetry, prose, drama and music;
abroad because of the stand he took against militarism and nationalism.
In 1919 he protested against the Amritsar Massacre by returning the
knighthood that the British had given him in 1915. He was close to
Mahatma Gandhi, who called him the ‘Great Sentinel’ of modern India;
but he generally held himself aloof from politics. His own translations
(Collected Poems and Plays of Rabindranath Tagore, 1936) have not proved
sufficient to sustain the worldwide reputation he enjoyed in his lifetime;
but as a Bengali writer his eminence is unchallenged. His works run to
thirty-two large volumes. They contain some sixty collections of verse;
novels such as Gora and The Home and the World; experimental plays

such as The Post Office and Red Oleanders; and essays on a host of
religious, social and literary topics. He also wrote over 2,000 songs,
which have become the national music of Bengal, and include the
national anthems of both India and Bangladesh. Late in life he took up
painting, exhibiting in Moscow, Berlin, Paris, London and New York. He
died in 1941.
WILLIAM RADICE was born in 1951 in London. He has pursued a double

career as a poet and as a scholar and translator of Bengali, and has
written or edited nearly thirty books. In addition to his translations of
Tagore for Penguin, his publications include eight books of his own
poems, Teach Yourself Bengali (1994), Myths and Legends of India (2001)
and A Hundred Letters from England (2003). He has also translated from
German (Martin Kämpchen’s The Honey-Seller and Other Stories, 1995,
and Sigfrid Gauch’s autobiographical novel Traces of My Father, 2002)
and Italian (Puccini’s Turandot for English National Opera). He wrote the
libretto for Param Vir’s Tagore-based chamber opera Snatched by the
Gods (1992). He has contributed regularly to BBC radio, has lectured
widely in South Asia, North America and Europe, and has been given
literary prizes in both India and Bangladesh.
William Radice is Senior Lecturer in Bengali at SOAS, University of
London, and from 1999 to 2002 was Head of the Departments of South
and South East Asia. He lives in London and Northumberland.

RABINDRANATH TAGORE

Selected Short Stories
Translated with an Introduction by
WILLIAM RADICE

PENGUIN BOOKS

Dedicated to the Rivers of Bengal Revised edition dedicated to Arun Deb of
Konnagar on the Shore of one of the Rivers of Bengal

PENGUIN BOOKS
Published by the Penguin Group
Penguin Books Ltd, 80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL, England
Penguin Group (USA) Inc., 375 Hudson Street, New York, New York 10014, USA
Penguin Books Australia Ltd, 250 Camberwell Road, Camberwell, Victoria 3124, Australia
Penguin Books Canada Ltd, 10 Alcorn Avenue, Toronto, Ontario, Canada, M4V 3B2
Penguin Books India (P) Ltd, 11 Community Centre, Panchsheel Park, New Delhi – 110 017,
India
Penguin Group (NZ), cnr Airborne and Rosedale Roads, Albany, Auckland 1310, New Zealand
Penguin Books (South Africa) (Pty) Ltd, 24 Sturdee Avenue, Rosebank 2196, South Africa
Penguin Books Ltd, Registered Offices: 80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL, England
www.penguin.com
First published in Penguin Books 1991
Revised edition 1994
Copyright © William Radice, 1991, 1994, 2005
All rights reserved
Acknowledgement is given to Visva-Bharati Publishing Department, on behalf of the
Rabindranath Tagore estate, and to Macmillan London Ltd for permission to reproduce the
following stories: ‘The Living and the Dead’, ‘The Postmaster’, ‘Housewife’, ‘Little Master’s
Return’, ‘Skeleton’, ‘A Single Night’, ‘Fool’s Gold’, ‘Punishment’, ‘A Problem Solved’, ‘Exercisebook’, ‘In the Middle of the Night’, ‘Elder Sister’ and ‘The Hungry Stones’
The moral right of the translator has been asserted
Except in the United States of America, this book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not,
by way of trade or otherwise, be lent, re-sold, hired out, or otherwise circulated without the
publisher’s prior consent in any form of binding or cover other than that in which it is published
and without a similar condition including this condition being imposed on the subsequent
purchaser
ISBN: 9781101491454

Contents
Preface to the 1991 Edition
Note on the 2005 Edition
Further Reading
Chronology
Introduction
The Living and the Dead
The Postmaster
Profit and Loss
Housewife
Little Master’s Return
The Divide
Taraprasanna’s Fame
Wealth Surrendered
Skeleton
A Single Night
Fool’s Gold
Holiday
Kabuliwallah
The Editor
Punishment
A Problem Solved
Exercise-book
Forbidden Entry
In the Middle of the Night
Unwanted
Elder Sister

Fury Appeased
Ṭhākurdā
Guest
Wishes Granted
False Hope
Son-sacrifice
The Hungry Stones
Thoughtlessness
The Gift of Sight
Appendix A: ‘Passing Time in the Rain’
Appendix B: Letters
Bibliographical Notes
Glossary
Map: The Padma River Area
Tagore’s Family Tree

Preface to the 1991 Edition
This book was conceived as a companion volume to my Selected Poems of
Tagore, published by Penguin Books in 1985 and revised in 1987. I
originally intended to do for the stories what I tried to do for the poems:
select from the full range of Tagore’s stories from 1884 to 1941, and
write an Introduction that would survey a lifetime of story-writing. I
soon realized that this was not practicable: a one-volume selection from
over ninety stories would either be too unwieldy or too thin. I also
wanted to reach a fair critical assessment of each story before choosing
or rejecting it, and it was difficult to do this for so many. It is possible
(fairly or unfairly) to skim through a poem to decide whether it might be
possible to translate it; this is not so easy with stories, which need to be
read carefully from beginning to end.
I also realized that there were other good reasons for limiting my
selection to the 1890s, Tagore’s most fertile decade as a short-story
writer, and that the Introduction could, in explaining these reasons, go
more deeply into a particular period of Tagore’s life than was possible in
my Introduction to Selected Poems. I believe that any book of English
translations of Tagore has to ‘introduce’ him in the sense that it should
not assume prior knowledge; but that is not to say that we should be
reluctant to move beyond the general portrait to examination of
particular phases or aspects of his life and work. The Tagore of this book
is a man in his thirties, with a wife and young children, not the majestic
sage of later fame.
Selected Poems was designed for the Western English reader. One of
the surprises that it brought me was the interest it aroused in India and
even in Bengal itself. It is unusual for a translation to provoke
controversy and interest among those who have no need for it; but I
have come to see that the very special importance that Tagore has for
Bengalis, their excellent command of English, and their understandable
desire that he should be appreciated and properly understood by
outsiders, all combine to make translations of Tagore newsworthy in
Bengal in a way that no translation of an English author has ever been –

to my knowledge – in Britain. This book, while mainly intended for nonBengalis, has therefore been done with a sideways glance at Bengali
readers and critics. I have given Bengali language sources in my
Introduction, and related what I have said quite closely to what I have
been able to learn of Bengali criticism of Tagore’s stories.
It seems appropriate, now that there are many Bengali speakers living
in Britain and other Western countries, to assume a greater communality
of interest between Bengali and non-Bengali readers: to refer in a
footnote to a book written in Bengali does not seem as academic as it
might have done even ten years ago. This is an aspect of the way our
societies are changing: Bengal is closer to Britain than ever before – so
Tagore is less distant from us than he was. At the same time, the extreme
difficulty and challenge of translating and presenting him properly
remains. Just because the stranger has become a neighbour does not
mean we have to work any less hard to understand him well.
I have used the same system of transliterating Bengali words as I used
in Selected Poems. For names of people and places, however, I have gone
for commonly accepted spellings with no diacritical marks. It is never
easy to indicate Bengali pronunciation by any system of Romanization.
When in doubt, consult a native speaker!
As always I must acknowledge the support of friends. Sujata
Chaudhuri, Ranjana Ash and the late Subhendusekhar Mukhopadhyay
answered my translation queries (the last named also gave me special
help with the notes in Appendix B), and Prasanta Kumar Paul – Tagore’s
leading contemporary biographer – gave me vital advice while I was
working on the Introduction. I must also thank Visva-Bharati University
in West Bengal and the School of Oriental and African Studies in London
for making it possible for me to go to Santiniketan for six weeks in
March and April 1989. The Introduction was largely written in Rabindra
Bhavana, the most beautiful and civilized library in the world. Finally I
should like to thank those at Rajshahi University in Bangladesh, who in
1987 took me by university jeep, and by ferries over the Padma and
Gorai rivers, to the still magical place where most of these stories were
written, a century ago.

Note on the 2005 Edition
To bring this book in line with the 2005 edition of my Selected Poems of
Tagore, a Chronology of Tagore’s life and a list of Further Reading have
been added. From the list, readers can see that this is not the only
volume of Tagore short stories to have appeared in English to challenge
the old translations published by Macmillan. Readers can now compare
new translations of a number of short stories.
I have made only one change to the text of the 1994 revised edition of
this book. The end of the story ‘Punishment’ is a notorious crux: when I
have given lectures in Bengal, I have often been asked how I translated
it. After years of reflection, I have decided to revert to the translation of
‘maraṇ!’ (p. 133) I arrived at in the first edition of 1991. I shall no doubt
spend the next ten years wondering if this was, after all, the right thing
to do.
Northumberland, 2005

Further Reading
The standard edition of Tagore’s Collected Bengali Works is the rabīndraracanābalī of Visva-Bharati, Calcutta. Vols. 1–26 were first published
between 1939 and 1949, with two supplementary volumes in 1940–41;
Vol. 27 appeared in 1965, and Vols. 28–30 in 1995–8. Visva-Bharati is
also the publisher of volumes of Tagore’s letters, his collected songs,
separate editions of individual works, and many books relating to
Tagore. Now that Tagore is no longer in copyright, other editions of
individual works are appearing in India, and collected editions on CDROM: Chirantan Rabindra Rachanaabali (Kolkata: Celcius Technologies)
and Gitabitan Live (Tagore’s songs, with recordings, Kolkata: ISS
Infoway). For many years, the standard edition (though it lacked any
information or notes) of Tagore’s own English translations was Collected
Poems and Plays, first published by Macmillan in London in 1936. This
has been superseded by a massive and excellent annotated edition,
published by the Sahitya Akademi in Delhi and edited by Sisir Kumar
Das. Vol. 1 (Poems) appeared in 1994, and Vol. 2 (Plays, Stories, Essays)
and Vol. 3 (A Miscellany) in 1996. The stories in Vol. 2 are only those
that Tagore translated himself.
The main library and archive for Tagore, and the largest collection of
his paintings, is at Rabindra Bhavana, Santiniketan, West Bengal. In
London, the Tagore Centre UK has an interesting collection of Tagore
books and documents.
The fullest bibliography of Tagore in English is still Rabindranath
Tagore: A Bibliography by Katherine Henn (The American Theological
Library Association, 1985); also useful is Dipali Ghosh, Translations of
Bengali Works into English: A Bibliography (London and New York:
Mansell Publishing Ltd, 1986).
For on-line material about Tagore, go especially to www.visvabharati.ac.in (an impressive and informative website), and to the
Internet journal Parabaas at www.parabaas.com.
Please note that Calcutta is now known as Kolkata and has been so

cited for works published since 2000.

Works by Tagore

For a useful list that includes older translations, see Encyclopedia of
Literary Translation into English, 2 vols., ed. Olive Classe (London and
Chicago: Fitzroy Dearborn Publishers, 2000).
Glimpses of Bengal: Selected Letters, newly trans. after Surendranath
Tagore’s translation of 1921 by Krishna Dutta and Andrew Robinson
and with an introduction by Andrew Robinson (London: Papermac,
1991).
Gora (novel), trans. Sujit Mukherjee, with an introduction by Meenakshi
Mukherjee (New Delhi: Sahitya Akademi, 1997).
He (fantasy fiction), trans. Kalyan Kundu and Anthony Loynes (London:
The Tagore Centre UK, 2003).
The Home and the World (novel), trans. Surendranath Tagore (London:
Macmillan, 1919); with an introduction by Anita Desai
(Harmondsworth: Penguin Books, 1985); new edn with a preface by
William Radice (London: Penguin Books, 2005).
I Won’t Let You Go: Selected Poems, trans. with an introduction by Ketaki
Kushari Dyson (Newcastle upon Tyne: Bloodaxe Books, 1991).
My Reminiscences, Surendranath Tagore’s translation of 1912, revised
and introduced by Andrew Robinson (London: Papermac, 1991).
Particles, Jottings, Sparks: The Collected Brief Poems, trans. with an
introduction by William Radice (New Delhi: HarperCollins, 2000;
London: Angel Books, 2001).
The Post Office (play), trans. William Radice, set as a play-within-a-play
by Jill Parvin (London: The Tagore Centre UK, 1995).
Quartet (novella), a translation by Kaiser Haq of caturaṅga (Oxford:
Heinemann, 1993).
Rabindranath Tagore: An Anthology, ed. Krishna Dutta and Andrew
Robinson (London: Picador, 1997).
Selected Poems, trans. with an introduction by William Radice
(Harmondsworth: Penguin Books, 1985, revised 1987, 1993; new
edns 1994, 2005; New Delhi: Penguin India, 1995).
Selected Short Stories (various translators), ed. Sukanta Chaudhuri (New

Delhi: Oxford University Press, 2000).
Selected Stories, trans. Krishna Dutta and Mary Lago (London: Macmillan,
1991).
Three Plays [raktakarabī, tapatī and arūp ratan], trans. with an extensive
introduction by Ananda Lal (Calcutta: Birla Foundation, 1987; New
Delhi: Oxford University Press, 2001).
Three Companions (novellas), trans. Sujit Mukherjee (Hyderabad and
London: Sangam Books, by arrangement with Orient Longman, 1992).

About Tagore

For fuller bibliographies, see the books by Krishna Dutta and Andrew
Robinson.
Chatterjee, Bhabatosh, Rabindranath Tagore and Modern Sensibility (New
Delhi: Oxford University Press, 1996).
Chaudhuri, Nirad C., Thy Hand, Great Anarch! India 1921–1952 (London:
The Hogarth Press, 1987), especially Book 2, Chapter 5, pp. 595–636:
‘Tagore; the lost great man of India’.
Das Gupta, Uma (ed.), A Difficult Friendship: Letters of Edward Thompson
and Rabindranath Tagore 1913–1940 (New Delhi: Oxford University
Press, 2003).
Dutta, Krishna and Andrew Robinson, Rabindranath Tagore: The MyriadMinded Man (London: Bloomsbury, 1995; New York: St Martin’s Press,
1996).
Dutta, Krishna and Andrew Robinson (eds.), Selected Letters of
Rabindranath Tagore, with a foreword by Amartya Sen (Cambridge
and New York: Cambridge University Press, 1997). A wide-ranging
selection, combining English letters with letters translated from
Bengali and with extensive notes and commentary; an essay on
Tagore and Einstein by Dipankar Home and Andrew Robinson is
included in an appendix.
Dyson, Ketaki Kushari, In Your Blossoming Flower-Garden: Rabindranath
Tagore and Victoria Ocampo (New Delhi: Sahitya Akademi, 1988).
Fraser, Bashabi (ed.), The Geddes-Tagore Correspondence (Edinburgh: The
Edinburgh Review 109, 2002; Kolkata: Visva-Bharati (The TagoreGeddes Correspondence), 2004).

Hogan, Patrick Colm and Lalita Pandit (eds.), Rabindranath Tagore:
Universality and Tradition (Cranbury, NJ, London, UK and Mississauga,
Ontario: Associated University Presses, 2003). Includes essays on
Tagore and nationalism, education, science, Yeats, Satyajit Ray, Gora
and Jane Austen, Janusz Korczak, etc.
Kripalani, Krishna, Rabindranath Tagore: A Biography (London: Oxford
University Press, and New York: Grove Press, 1962; revised edn,
Calcutta: Visva-Bharati, 1980).
Kundu, Kalyan, Sakti Bhattacharya and Kalyan Sircar (eds.), Imagining
Tagore: Rabindranath Tagore and the British Press (1912–1941)
(Kolkata: Sahitya Samsad in collaboration with The Tagore Centre UK,
2000).
Lago, Mary M. (ed.), Imperfect Encounter: Letters of William Rothenstein
and Rabindranath Tagore 1911–1941 (Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press, 1972).
Lago, Mary and Ronald Warwick (eds.), Rabindranath Tagore: Perspectives
in Time (London: Macmillan, 1989). Includes essays on Tagore’s
Western career, his short stories, his educational ideals, Tagore and
Elmhirst, Tagore’s paintings, Tagore and Western composers, etc.
O’Connell, Kathleen M., Rabindranath Tagore: The Poet as Educator
(Kolkata: Visva-Bharati, 2002).
Radice, William, Poetry and Community: Lectures and Essays 1991–2001
(New Delhi: DC Publishers, 2003). Includes essays on translating
Tagore, and on Tagore and the Nobel Prize.
Radice, William, ‘Rabindranath Tagore’ in Oxford Dictionary of National
Biography, Vol. 53 (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2004).
Ray, Sibnarayan, From the Broken Nest to Visva-Bharati: Six Exploratory
Essays on Rabindranath (Kolkata: Renaissance Publishers, 2001).
Robinson, Andrew, The Art of Rabindranath Tagore, with a foreword by
Satyajit Ray (London: André Deutsch, 1989).
Sahitya Akademi (ed.), Rabindranath Tagore 1861–1961: A Centenary
Volume (New Delhi: Sahitya Akademi, 1961, reprinted 1986).
Introduction by Jawaharlal Nehru; memoirs by several of Tagore’s
associates; essays on all aspects of Tagore’s life and work; essays on
Tagore in other lands; bibliography of Tagore’s Bengali and English
works (with dates); very useful chronicle of his life compiled by
Prabhat Kumar Mukherjee (Tagore’s biographer in Bengali) and

Kshitis Roy.
Thompson, Edward, Rabindranath Tagore: Poet and Dramatist (London
and New York: Oxford University Press, 1926; second edn 1948; new
edn with an introduction by Harish Trivedi, New Delhi: Oxford
University Press, 1989).

Chronology
1858 The British Crown takes over the Government of India, following
the Mutiny of 1857.
1861 Tagore born in Calcutta, in the family house at Jorasanko.
1873 Goes with his father Debendranath Tagore on a tour of the
Western Himalayas.
1875 His mother dies.
1877 Starts to publish regularly in his family’s monthly journal, bhāratī.
1878 First visit to England.
1880 His book sandhyā saṅgīt (Evening Songs) acclaimed by
Bankimchandra Chatterjee, the leading writer of the day.
1883 Controversy over Lord Ripon’s Ilbert bill, to permit Indian judges
to try Englishmen, intensifies antagonism between British and Indians.
Tagore marries.
1884 His sister-in-law Kadambari commits suicide.
1885 First Indian National Congress meets at Bombay.
1886 Tagore’s daughter Madhurilata (Bela) born.
1888 His son Rathindranath born.
1890 His father puts him in charge of the family estates.
Second, brief visit to England.
Starts to write prolifically for a new family journal, sādhanā.
1898 Sedition Bill; arrest of Bal Gangadhar Tilak; Tagore reads his paper
kaṇtha-rodh (The Throttled) at a public meeting in Calcutta.
1901 Marriage of his elder daughters Bela and Renuka (Rani).
Inauguration of the Santiniketan School.
1902 His wife dies.
1903 Rani dies.
1904 Satischandra Ray, his assistant at Santiniketan, dies.
1905 Svadeśī agitation against Lord Curzon’s proposal to partition
Bengal, with Tagore playing a leading part.
His father dies.

1907 His younger son Samindra dies.
1908 Thirty-five revolutionary conspirators in Bombay and Bengal
arrested.
1909 Indian Councils Act, increasing power of provincial councils,
attempts to meet Indian political aspirations.
1910 Bengali gītāñjali published.
1912 Third visit to England; first visit to America; publication of the
English Gitanjali.
1913 Tagore awarded the Nobel Prize for Literature.
1914 230,000 Indian troops join the first winter campaign of the Great
War.
1915 Tagore’s first meeting with Gandhi.
He receives a knighthood.
1916 Home Rule League formed by Annie Besant and B. G. Tilak.
Tagore goes to Japan and the USA; lectures on Nationalism and
Personality.
1917 E. S. Montagu, Secretary of State, declares the development of selfgovernment in India to be official policy.
Tagore reads his poem ‘India’s Prayer’ at the Indian National
Congress in Calcutta.
1918 Rowlatt Act against Sedition provokes Gandhi’s first civil
disobedience campaign.
Tagore’s eldest daughter Bela dies.
German-Indian Conspiracy Trial in San Francisco implicates him: he
sends a telegram to President Wilson asking for protection ‘against
such lying calumny’.
1919 Gen. Reginald Dyer’s Amritsar Massacre; Tagore returns his
knighthood.
1920 Death of Tilak leaves Gandhi undisputed leader of the nationalist
movement. Tagore travels to London, France, Holland, America.
1921 Back to London, France, Switzerland, Germany, Sweden, Germany
again, Austria, Czechoslovakia.
After meeting with Gandhi in Calcutta, Tagore detaches himself
from the Swaraj (home rule) campaign.
Visva-Bharati, his university at Santiniketan, inaugurated.

1922 Gandhi sentenced to six years imprisonment.
Tagore tours West and South India.
1923 Congress party under Motilal Nehru and C. R. Das ends its boycott
of elections to the legislatures established by the Government of India
Act (1919).
1924 Tagore travels to China and Japan.
After only two months at home, sails for South America: stays with
Victoria Ocampo in Buenos Aires.
1925 Returns via Italy.
Gandhi visits Santiniketan; Tagore again refuses to be actively
involved in Swaraj, or in the charka (spinning) cult.
Bengal Criminal Law Amendment Act crushes new terrorist
campaign in Bengal.
1926 Tagore travels to Italy, Switzerland (staying with Romain Rolland
at Villeneuve), Austria, England, Norway, Sweden, Denmark,
Germany (meets Einstein), Czechoslovakia, Bulgaria, Greece, Egypt.
1927 Extensive tour of South-east Asia.
1928 Starts painting.
1929 To Canada, Japan, Saigon.
1930 To England (via France) to deliver Hibbert Lectures at Manchester
College, Oxford (The Religion of Man); to Germany, Switzerland,
Russia, back to Germany, USA.
Exhibitions of his paintings in Birmingham, London and several
European capitals.
Gandhi’s ‘salt-march’ from Ahmedabad to the coast inaugurates new
civil disobedience campaign.
1932 Tagore travels (by air) to Iran and Iraq.
His only grandson Nitindra dies.
Gandhi declares fast-unto-death in jail in Poona; later breaks his
fast with Tagore at his bedside.
1934–6 Tours of Ceylon and India with a dance-troupe from
Santiniketan.
1935 Government of India Act emerges from Round Table Conferences
of 1930–32, with all-India Federation and provincial autonomy as its

main aims.
1937 Tagore delivers Convocation Address to Calcutta University, in
Bengali.
Starts Department of Chinese Studies at Visva-Bharati.
Congress Party ministries formed in most states.
Tagore falls seriously ill in September.
1939 Congress ministries resign on grounds that the British Government
has failed to make an acceptable declaration of its war aims.
1940 Tagore’s last meeting with Gandhi, at Santiniketan.
Death of C. F. Andrews, Tagore’s staunch friend and supporter at
Santiniketan.
Oxford University holds special Convocation at Santiniketan to
confer Doctorate on Tagore.
Muslim League under Jinnah demands separate state for Muslims.
1941 Tagore dies in Calcutta.
1942 Congress Party calls on Britain to ‘quit India’ immediately.
1946 Congress forms interim Government under Jawaharlal Nehru.
1947 Viscount Mountbatten announces partition: India and Pakistan
become independent dominions.
1948 Assassination of Gandhi.
1950 India is declared a Republic.

… I may, if I am lucky, tap the deep pathos that pertains to all authentic art
because of the breach between its eternal values and the sufferings of a muddled
world…
Vladimir Nabokov, Lectures on Russian Literature

Introduction
Rabindranath Tagore wrote over ninety short stories during his long and
abundant literary career. It would be possible, though not very
satisfactory, to make a one-volume selection from the full range of his
stories; but a selection of those written during the 1890s is indicated not
only by the need to limit numbers. Tagore was specially committed to
the short story during this decade, and fifty-nine stories belong to it.
From 1891 to 1895 he wrote forty-four – almost one a month. In 1896–
7, and again in 1899, he stopped writing short stories as such, but his
interest in story-telling was sustained in the narrative and dramatic
poems that made up his books kathā (‘Tales’) and kāhinī (‘Stories’),
published in 1900.1 If we count these in with the prose stories, we arrive
at over eighty narratives in prose or verse, an astonishing flow that only
waned when Tagore’s interest shifted to the psychological novella.
cokher bāli (‘Speck in the Eye’) and naṣṭanīṛ (‘The Broken Nest’) appeared
simultaneously in serial form in 1901. With their greater length,
narrower time-scale, and emphasis on detailed analysis of emotion
rather than factual life-history, they mark a break with the short stories
that preceded them. The stories that Tagore produced at intervals over
the rest of his career are related to his novellas and novels, rather than
to his earlier stories. For this, and for several other reasons, the stories
from which I have made the present selection form a group.
Why did Tagore – always primarily a lyric poet – write so many short
stories at this time? The simplest answer is that the periodicals with
which he was associated, and the readership for those periodicals,
demanded them. Most nineteenth-century Bengali literature reached its
readers initially in the pages of periodicals. The leading literary figure of
the 1870s and 1880s, Bankimchandra Chatterjee (1838–94), established
new artistic, intellectual and typographical standards in his journal
baṅgadarśan, serializing many of his own novels in it; and Tagore
recalled in My Reminiscences (1917) the feverish excitement with which
each monthly issue was awaited. His own first attempts at prose fiction,
such as bhikhārinī (‘The Beggar-girl’, 1877) or the historical romance

rājarṣi (‘The Royal Sage’, 1887), were published in periodicals; and he
was fortunate, as he strove to establish himself as a writer, to live at a
time in which Calcutta’s literary-magazine culture was reaching its
zenith. The periodicals to which he contributed so extensively were
packed with ideas, debate, reviews and counter-reviews, as well as the
latest poetry and fiction. Writers and editors were keenly alive to literary
developments abroad; and as the taste for short stories developed in
America, Britain and Europe, so it did in Bengal.
On 2 May 1891, an advertisement appeared in The Bengalee for a new
weekly magazine, hitabādī, listing a number of prominent writers among
its contributors. Tagore’s name was among them, as well as
Nagendranath Gupta (already established as a short-story writer) and the
great Bankim himself (‘religious subjects only’). No copies have survived;
but Tagore certainly contributed at least one short story to each of the
first six issues. It is said that he stopped contributing because the editor,
Krishnakamal Bhattacharya, complained that his stories were too
sophisticated for the general reader. Before long, however, he had a
much better showcase – the magazine sādhanā (‘Endeavour’), whose
significance in the development of modern Bengali literature is
comparable to Bankim’s baṅgadarśan or Pramatha Chaudhuri’s sabujpatra (‘Green Leaves’, started with Tagore’s encouragement in 1914).
The first issue of sādhanā was advertised on the back of another
leading journal, the tattvabodhinī patrikā, in its Āśvin (September–
October) issue, 1891. It was clear from the list of contributors that it was
to be virtually a Tagore family magazine, with eight of Rabindranath’s
brothers or cousins included. The contents of the first issue included
poetry, criticism, ‘Modern Science’, music, reviews of books and other
journals, and short stories by Sudhindranath Tagore and Rabindranath
himself. But such was the size and prestige of the Tagore family that the
magazine instantly acquired a central position in Calcutta literary life.
Rabindranath’s nephews Sudhindranath and Nitindranath (sons of his
eldest brother, Dwijendranath) were named as editor and manager, but
it soon became obvious that Rabindranath was the magazine’s prime
mover, closely directing not only its contents but its printing and design.
Like hitabādī, sādhanā was paid for by persuading wealthy Calcuttans to
buy ‘shares’ – which were actually more like subscriptions, as no one

received any return for his investment.
Tagore published his story khokābābur pratyābartan (‘Little Master’s
Return’) in the first issue of sādhanā (30 November 1891). He also wrote
all the reviews of recent books and other magazines, and a selection of
scientific reports. Although other members of the family shared the
reviewing in later issues – covering English as well as Bengali
publications – Tagore’s dominance continued. To the sixth issue, for
example, he contributed a short story, an article on ‘Ignorance of Bengali
Literature’, an instalment from his yurop-yātrīr ḍāyāri (a diary of his
second visit to England in September–October 1890), bimbabatī (a ‘fairytale’ poem, later included in sonār tari, ‘The Golden Boat’, 1894),
translations of Heine’s poems from the original German, two songs
written for Brahmo worship,1 reviews, and replies to readers’ letters.
sādhanā continued until October 1895, with Tagore becoming its
official editor in November 1894. In the end, financial difficulties,
weariness with what had become an unshared editorial burden, and
attacks from literary opponents, all got the better of him, and he closed
the magazine down. In a letter to one of the contributors to the
magazine he wrote: ‘I have broken my ties with sādhanā completely. My
enemies will sneer no doubt, but I can’t go on exhausting myself merely
in order to ward off the sneers of my enemies.’ 2 From other letters we
gather that he had been tiring of the magazine for the past year. Not the
least of his difficulties was his distance from Calcutta: collection of
material, editing, arranging the printing, proof-reading, all had to be
done from remote Shelidah in East Bengal, as we shall see.
Thirty-six of Tagore’s short stories were published in sādhanā. It is
quite possible that he would not have written them at all if the magazine
had not existed. His story-writing paused when it closed down, and
revived again when he reluctantly became editor of another monthly
journal, bhāratī, from May 1898 to April 1899. This magazine, however,
was more of a forum for the writings on the political and social
questions that were preoccupying him at the time. All in all, it is with
sādhanā that his best short stories of the 1890s are most closely
associated. It was sādhanā that was their sine qua non.
In various letters, interviews and comments on the stories (which the
reader of Bengali can conveniently find in the Appendix to Volume IV of

galpaguccha, Tagore’s collected short stories1), Tagore repeatedly gave a
rather different explanation. In 1909 he told a questioner:
To begin with I only wrote poetry – I didn’t write stories. One day my father called me and said,
‘I want you to take charge of the estates.’ I was astonished: I was a poet, a scribbler – what did I
know about such matters? But Father said, ‘Never mind that – I want you to do it.’ What could I
do? Father had ordered me, so I had to go. Managing the jamidāri gave me the opportunity to
mix with various kinds of people, and this was how my story-writing began.2

In an English interview given in 1935, when asked about ‘the
background of your short stories and how they originated’, Tagore
replied:
It was when I was quite young that I began to write short stories. Being a landlord I had to go to
villages, and thus I came in touch with village people and their simple modes of life. I enjoyed
the surrounding scenery and the beauty of rural Bengal. The river system of Bengal, the best part
of this province, fascinated me and I used to be quite familiar with those rivers. I got glimpses
into the life of the people, which appealed to me very much indeed. At first I was quite
unfamiliar with the village life as I was born and brought up in Calcutta and so there was an
element of mystery for me. My whole heart went out to the simple village people as I came in
close contact with them. They seemed to belong to quite another world, so very different from
that of Calcutta. My earlier stories have this background, and they describe this contact of mine
with the village people. They have the freshness of youth. Before I had written these short stories
there was not anything of that type in Bengali literature. No doubt Bankimchandra had written
some stories but they were of the romantic type; mine were full of the temperament of the rural
people… There is a note of universal appeal in them, for man is the same everywhere. My later
stories haven’t got that freshness, that tenderness of the earlier stories.1

This explanation of the origins of the stories is what Tagore believed and
has been widely accepted by Bengali readers and critics. In many ways it
is true, and the reader of the marvellous letters that Tagore wrote
describing his life as manager of the family estates will find passages
that relate quite exactly to characters, feelings and places in the short
stories. The description of the boys playing at the beginning of chuṭi
(‘Holiday’), for example, is taken straight from observation, though the
girl who sits on the fallen mast becomes a boy in the story:
There was a large mast lying on the mud by the river. A bunch of naked little boys had, after
much debate, realized that if they heaved and puffed and shouted they would be able to roll it
along, and that this would be an exciting new game. They set to work to carry out this plan:
‘Heave ho! Watch her go! Heave ho!’ Each time they managed to roll it over, they all cheered.
But there were a couple of girls among the boys, and their feelings were different. They were

forced, because they had no friends of their own, to join in with the boys, but were obviously not
enjoying such a violent, physical game. One of the girls, solemnly and coolly and without
speaking, firmly sat herself down on the mast…2

But some of the passages often quoted as sources for the short stories do
not seem to be sources at all. Tagore was friendly with a local
postmaster: early on, a post office was actually situated in a ground-floor
room of the family house at Sajadpur. But the real postmaster does not
seem to correspond with the postmaster in Tagore’s famous story of that
name: it is hard to imagine the dreamy, lonely postmaster of the story
telling this amusing anecdote:
Yesterday he told me that the local people so revered the Ganges that if a relative died they
would grind his bones into powder and keep it; then, if anyone came who had drunk the waters
of the Ganges, they would mix the bone-powder with his drink and, by so doing, imagine that
part of their dead relative had mingled with the Ganges. I laughed and said, ‘You’re making it
up.’ He thought soberly for a while and then confessed, ‘Could be, sir, could be.’1

Moreover, many of the characters in the stories are not ‘simple village
people’, but of the middle or gentry class. Some stories are more urban
than rural; some are supernatural fantasies; and many of them contradict
Tagore’s statement in the same English interview quoted above that he
had ‘no social or political problems’ in mind when he wrote them. The
thirty stories translated for the present volume convey, in fact, a
complex and varied picture of a society in transition, and are far from
being simple scenes of timeless peasant life. So what was the exact
nature of the relationship between Tagore’s short stories and his
experiences as a zamindar in East Bengal?
There is no doubt that the decade in which Tagore’s main address was
‘Kuthibari, Shelidah, Nadia District, East Bengal’ was crucial to his
emotional, intellectual and spiritual development. His pantheism, his
involvement with rural economic improvement, his dislike of the city,
his calls for Hindu–Muslim unity, his interest in folk-literature and the
songs of the wandering Bauls,2 were all rooted in these vital years away
from the cultured yet oppressive atmosphere of Jorasanko, the Tagore
house in Calcutta. The Tagore family owned three paraganas (estates) in
the Padma river region, acquired by Tagore’s grandfather Dwarkanath:
Birahimpur, Kaligram and Sajadpur (all now in Bangladesh). The kāchāri

(estate office) for Birahimpur was at Shelidah; for Kaligram it was at
Potisar; Sajadpur was named after the village where the Tagores owned
a large (but little-used) zamindar’s house. In November 1889 Tagore’s
father, Debendranath, transferred the management of the estates from
Jyotirindranath (Rabindranath’s fifth eldest brother) to Rabindranath,
with the clear understanding that he would be an active, resident
landlord rather than the absentee that most Calcutta landowners had
become. Debendranath had striven hard to pay off the debts incurred by
the extravagant Dwarkanath, and had kept his share of the inheritance
in his hands (the sons of his late brother Girindranath, on coming of age,
received two-fifths). Because the estates had previously been in danger,
and because Debendranath was a man of the highest moral principles, he
believed that the tenants should have a resident landlord. Perhaps he
also felt that practical experience would be good for his poetically
inclined, formally unqualified youngest son.
Tagore had been to the Padma once as a child with his brother
Jyotirindranath, and near the end of his life he recalled the trip in his
book chelebelā (‘My Boyhood Days’, 1940). But he had no real
acquaintance with the region. Immediately on taking charge of the
estates, he took his wife, a maid, his daughter Bela, his son
Rathindranath and his nephew Balendranath on an exploratory visit –
vividly described in one of his first letters to his niece Indira Devi.1 Then
as now the journey from Calcutta was quite complicated. Kusthia could
be reached by rail via Ranaghat: from there Shelidah could either be
reached by boat, north-west along the small Gorai river and then east
along the Padma; or else the Gorai could be crossed and Shelidah
reached by land from the south.
He took his family back to Calcutta, but immediately returned to
Shelidah. His isolated jamidāri life now began in earnest. Shelidah was
his headquarters, but he also stayed at Sajadpur, and spent many nights
on the magnificent family houseboat – which his father and grandfather
had kept on the Hooghly in Calcutta but which Rabindranath brought to
Shelidah, naming it the ‘Padma’. It had two main bedrooms and a
dining-room, and was handsomely fitted out in nineteenth-century
aristocratic style; and in this boat Tagore could travel along the Ichamati
and Baral rivers to Sajadpur, or the Atrai river to Kaligram.

Legend has it that the name ‘Shelidah’ derives from an English indigoplanter called Shelley, and the daha (whirlpool) formed by the
confluence of the Padma and Gorai rivers.2 An older kuṭhibāṛi (indigofactory house) had fallen into decay, and an attractive two-storey house
was built by Jyotirindranath. It can still be visited today, and there are
relics such as the pālki (palanquin) in which Tagore was carried round
the villages. The Padma river has retreated a long way from the house,
and in the dry season can barely be seen; but the peace and isolation of
the place can still be appreciated.
Tagore felt lonely at first, missing his four-year-old daughter and twoyear-old son; his early letters to his wife do not always describe the
region in rhapsodic terms.1 His estate-duties, which he always carried
out most conscientiously, were sometimes irksome and interfered with
his writing and thought. His letters give glimpses – not always
complimentary – of some of the staff with whom he had to work,
including ‘Maulabi-saheb’, an Urdu-speaking non-Bengali Muslim who
seems to have exhausted Tagore with his endless talking:
Maulabi-saheb follows me around all the time. He drives me mad with his constant chatter. He’s
as hard to bear as the rheumatism in my shoulders that I suffered at Sajadpur… This morning he
isn’t here, so I’m getting some relief.2

But irritations apart, Tagore quickly came to love the region profoundly.
Its rivers, skies, fields, sandbanks and changing seasons pervade many of
his stories, inspired numerous poems, and were above all celebrated in
the magnificent letters that he wrote between 1888 and 1895 to his
niece Indira Devi, daughter of Satyendranath Tagore. These letters are
much more consciously literary than the letters he wrote to his wife or to
friends such as the writer Pramatha Chaudhuri (who married Indira) or
the scientist Jagadish Chandra Bose; and in March 1895 he asked her to
copy them out. From the two khātā (exercise-books) that they filled,
preserved in the Tagore archives at Santiniketan, he made an extensive
selection of letters, calling them chinnapatra (‘Torn Leaves’, 1912).3
His restlessly itinerant life (the family also owned estates in Orissa
which he visited from time to time), long absences from his wife and
children, and a growing conviction that life and education away from
the city would be healthier for them, made him decide to bring them to

Shelidah. Moreover in February 1895 he and his nephews Surendranath
and Balendranath had started a business venture, ‘Tagore & Co.’, dealing
in grain, jute, and sugar-cane-crushing machines, and the office was at
nearby Kusthia.1 So in August 1898 he brought his wife and five children
to Kuthibari. His son Rathindranath in his memoir of his father recalls
their life there affectionately: the houseboat trips in the winter, botanical
expeditions with Jagadish Chandra Bose, the medieval ceremonials with
which the village headmen would greet the arrival of Tagore the
zamindar, and the unusual arrangements that were made for the
children’s education:
Our teacher of English was an Englishman of a rather interesting type. He was given a bungalow
in the compound. There he lived with thousands of silkworms in which he had become interested
through Akshoy Kumar Maitra, the historian. On Sundays, discarding all clothes, Mr Lawrence
would wrap himself in old newspapers and lie amongst the caterpillars, which delighted in
crawling all over him. He was very fond of them and used to say they were his children.2

Reading between the lines of Tagore’s letters to his wife, however –
before she came to live at Shelidah, and afterwards when she was
visiting relatives in Calcutta – it is not hard to see that she never really
shared his fondness for a remote and peaceful rural life far away from
the city. This was but one of the many temperamental differences
between them. Eleven years his junior (she was only eleven when he
married her in 1883), she did not live long enough for him to
understand fully that it is not fair for a poet to expect his wife to be a
soul-mate. The attempt to live as a family at Shelidah lasted only two
years. In the summer of 1901, arrangements for the marriage of his
eldest daughter, Madhurilata (Bela), were put in train: Tagore’s wife was
no doubt relieved to make this an excuse to stay on in Calcutta. But
there were other factors weakening his ties with Shelidah. Three
grandsons of Debendranath’s brother Girindranath were of age now and
were entitled to a share of Dwarkanath’s bequest. After a court-case in
1897, the Sajadpur estate and some other lands were transferred to
them, and Debendranath’s final will of 1899 laid down further divisions.
Rabindranath kept the Birahimpur (Shelidah) estate until 1921, when it
passed to Satyendranath’s son Surendranath; but long before then
Tagore’s interests had shifted to Santiniketan, where his unique
experiment in education and community living was inaugurated by the

foundation of the Santiniketan ashram in 1901. His visits to the region
he had loved so much became more and more infrequent. In a letter to
his wife written towards the end of 1901, we sense the closing of a
chapter:
I find it very poignant to be back here at Shelidah. It’s human nature always to find what we are
about to leave more beautiful. I associate Shelidah with both happy and sad memories – but
more of them are happy than sad. This is not, though, the best time to be here. Everything is
soaked in dew, there is mist until eight o’clock in the morning, and in the evening there is fog.
The water is very low in the well and the pond – malaria is widespread. We were right to leave
Shelidah: the children would have fallen ill if we had stayed. Bolpur is much purer and healthier.
But what masses of roses are in bloom! Huge, beautiful roses. And there’s a lovely smell of
acacia-flowers all around. Your old friend Shelidah sends you a few acacia-flowers with this
letter.1

Tagore is recalling here the realities of his life at Shelidah with and
without his family, and he typically uses in his third sentence the
Bengali words sukh (‘pleasure’, ‘happiness’) and duḥkh (‘sadness’,
‘trouble’). These are frequent words in Tagore’s writing, and the
euphonious and rhythmic compound sukhe-dukhe (‘in happiness and
sadness’) often trips off his tongue in poems and songs. It is sometimes
tempting to translate this as ‘in joy and sorrow’, but the spiritual
connotation that these English words have is probably not right for sukh
and duḥkh, which always seem to refer to immediate, physical, material
moods and feelings (‘joy’ would be ānanda).
In order to capture the exact nature of Tagore’s experience of riverine
Bengal, and its relationship with his stories, let us begin on land, as it
were, with immediate day-to-day reality, using one of the headings that
Tagore gave to a brief three-part selection of his letters to Indira Devi
that he included in bicitra prabandha (‘Miscellaneous Essays’, 1907).

sthale (on land)
Because the beauties of the Padma region inspired Tagore to such
rhapsodies and ecstasies – in his letters to Indira Devi and in many of his
poems – it is tempting to see this as the dominant mood. But romantic
though he was, he always kept his feet on the ground. If we take the
totality of his life at Shelidah, including his practical work as a zamindar

and businessman, his domestic life, and his editorial work, as well as the
whole range of his poetry and stories, we find that realism is just as
much present as lyricism, romanticism or pantheism. Perhaps the most
moving of his poems of the 1890s are to be found in citrā and caitāli
(1896); and it is worth looking at them in order to understand that even
in his lyric poetry the note of realism is strong. The best modern critics
of Tagore – especially Abu Sayeed Ayyub1 in his celebrated book
ādhunikatā o rabīndranāth (‘Modernism and Rabindranath’, 1968) – have
rightly associated this realism with the strain of uncertainty, foreboding,
despair or agnosticism that runs right through Tagore’s work, in his
youthful writing as well as in the stark poetry of his old age. Ayyub
rightly quotes sandhyā (‘Evening’) from citrā as a touchstone for this
realistic, doubting mood. The beautiful rural evening is exquisitely
described, but at the end of the poem this is what the earth seems to
draw to her breast as darkness falls:
… such sadness, such torment,
So many wars, so many deaths:
No end! The darkness gradually thickens
As it falls; silence deepens; the world’s
Consciousness sleeps. From the lonely
Earth’s huge heart arises a solemn
Painful question, an agonized weary
Melody flung at the empty sky:
‘Where now? How much further?’

Most of the poems in caitāli are sonnet-like poems of fourteen lines
rhymed in delicately precise couplets. They cover many moods. Some
are pen-portraits of rural people – a girl looking after her little brother
by the riverside, or a herd-boy coaxing a cow into the river for a bath;
and sometimes what Tagore observes and feels is bleak. In karuṇā
(‘Tragedy’) a child is run over by a cart and his mother rolls on the
ground, her clothes coming adrift in grief. In mauna (‘Silence’) the poet
himself succumbs to despair: ‘Today, everything I have said seems
pointless… In the depth of the night, nothing but the cry of dumb,
idiotic silence seems to speak out of the dark.’ In anābṛṣṭi (‘Drought’), we
have a world deserted by the gods:
I have heard that in a former time the gods

Used to come from heaven to earth
Out of love for womankind. That time has gone.
By the dried-up, burnt-up river and fields
Of this Baiśākh day, a peasant-girl
Pitifully entreats, ‘Come, send rain!’
She keeps on looking at the sky
With sad eyes, in pathetic expectation.
But rain does not come; the deaf wind
Impatiently drives away all clouds;
The sun licks up all moisture from the sky
With his fierce tongue. In the age of Kali,
Alas, the gods have grown old. A girl’s
Plea can only be directed, now, at man.

Moving from this poem to the short stories in the present volume, can
even the most cursory reader deny that the world and age they describe
is the same kali-yuga (age of Kali1) in which the gods have grown old?
Story after story is tragic, often unbearably so. What consolation is there
for Raicharan in ‘Little Master’s Return’? Or for Ratan at the end of ‘The
Postmaster’? Or for Banamali in ‘The Divide’? What salvation is there for
Yajnanath in ‘Wealth Surrendered’? Or for Kadambini in ‘The Living and
the Dead’? What future is there for the princess in ‘False Hope’? What
reassurance for the dog at the end of ‘Unwanted’? No wonder Tagore
was stung when critics accused him of writing unrealistic, poeticized
stories! At the very end of his life, in May 1941, in a conversation with
Buddhadeva Bose, one of the leading Bengali critics and poets of the
1930s, he stressed with some pain that his stories were true to life:
I have written innumerable short lyrics – maybe no other poet in the world has written so many
– but I feel surprised when you say that my stories are over poetical. At one time I used to rove
down Bengal’s rivers, and I observed the wonderful way of life of Bengal’s villages… I would say
there is no lack of realism in my stories. I wrote from what I saw, what I felt in my heart – my
direct experience… Those who say that my stories are fanciful are wrong. Maybe one could say
that in stories such as ‘Skeleton’ or ‘The Hungry Stones’ imagination predominates, but not
completely even in those.1

Defenders of Tagore have taken pains to point out the close observation
that does indeed lie behind many of the characters, scenes and situations
in his stories – the vivid picture of Bengal that is found in them.
Buddhadeva Bose himself, for example, in a fine essay on Tagore’s

stories, wrote:
All of Bengal can be found here. Not only facts, but her living soul: we feel her pulse as we turn
the pages of galpaguccha. Her changing seasons, the vital flow of her rivers, her plains, her
bamboo-groves, her festival canopies and chariots; her cool, moist, richly fertile fragrance; her
mischievous, noisy, lively boys and girls; her kind, skilled, intelligent women…2

His patriotic list goes on for several more lines, and other Bengali critics
have repeated or extended it; or they have pointed to the accuracy of the
stories as social documents. We find in Tagore’s stories ample evidence
of his reflections on child-marriage and the dowry-system (‘Profit and
Loss’); bigoted orthodoxy or casteism (‘Son-sacrifice’); changing
landlord–tenant relations (‘A Problem Solved’); the political frustrations
of a rising educated class (‘A Single Night’); the growing gulf between
town and country (‘The Postmaster’); ruinous litigation (‘The Divide’);
dehumanizing poverty (‘Punishment’); cruel and corrupt officialdom
(‘Thoughtlessness’). But to find elements of naturalism in Tagore’s stories
does not seem to get to the heart of his realism, which was essentially
the realism of feeling. This is what Tagore clearly felt he had achieved,
and this was why he was not prepared to dismiss as unrealistic even the
supernatural stories – ‘Skeleton’, ‘In the Middle of the Night’, ‘The
Hungry Stones’, and several others not included in the present selection.
Such stories are just as full of pathos, grief, anguish and terror as the
more naturalistic tales. They are also full of humour and irony – and this
is another aspect of Tagore’s realism that is found in both ‘supernatural’
and ‘natural’ stories. In many the narrator of the story is a shallow,
jaunty, self-regarding individual, who is changed and deepened by the
events of the story, or by a story told to him by someone else. This
‘Ancient Mariner’ technique is particularly characteristic of the
supernatural tales, as if Tagore was concerned to place the fantastic and
other-worldly within an ordinary, realistic frame. But the same tone is
found in the ‘natural’ stories like ‘Kabuliwallah’, ‘The Editor’ or ‘
hākurdā’; and Tagore’s capacity for scepticism, mockery and hardheaded rationality contributes just as much to his realism as does his
awareness of grief and suffering.

jal-pathe (by water)

This is another of the headings under which Tagore printed his brief and
early selection of his letters to Indira Devi: evocative of his splendid
houseboat, or the small ‘jolly-boat’ which can be seen today in the
Kuthibari Museum. It has been said by some critics that his characteristic
view of East Bengal was, as it were, ‘through a window’ of his
houseboat: the life of the people passed before his eyes like the banks of
the Padma. Distanced by his status as zamindar, his aristocratic lineage
and demeanour, his refinement and education, Tagore could never really
know the ordinary people, and his stories are unrealistic as a result.
Again, this is a charge that he vigorously denied. In a speech at a
felicitation ceremony in 1940 he said:
People have often ganged up against me to say: ‘He’s a rich man’s son. He was born – as the
English put it – “with a silver spoon in his mouth”. How can he know about villages?’ But I can
honestly say that those who say that know less than I do. How can they know anything?
Conventional wisdom isn’t true knowledge. In true knowledge there is love: the heartfelt love
with which I have observed village life has opened the door for me. It might sound like boasting,
but I would say that very few writers in Bengal have looked at their country with as much feeling
as I have.1

Just as in understanding Tagore’s realism we have to go beyond
naturalism to something deeper, so we have to probe into the exact
nature of the knowledge from which his realism derived. It did, no
doubt, include a quite detailed knowledge of the customs, agriculture,
dialect and religion of the villagers who were his tenants, and he started
to take a special interest in folk-literature at this time.2 But this was not
exactly the knowledge that impelled his short stories or poems. We do
not find in them the technical rural terms, or the ear for dialect that we
find in more recent Bengali writers. Islam, the faith of most of his
tenants, is almost completely absent.3 In many ways Tagore’s rural
characters are generalized rather than specific, and the language they
speak is standard Bengali: only rarely does he attempt to give his
dialogue a truly peasant flavour. So in what way did his knowledge
actually run deep?
In Tagore’s art – even in his most realistic, prosaic, ironic or sceptical
art – we are never far from the transcendental Spirit that Indians
through the ages have attempted to know and articulate. The sages who
wrote the Upanisads in the seclusion of their forest hermitages realized

there must be a supreme cosmic force behind the samsāra (world) of
mortal existence, the māyā (illusion) of sense-perception, or the
svargaloka (heaven) of the Vedic and Hindu gods; and Tagore’s spiritual
endeavours were in direct descent from theirs. He took it for granted
that higher levels of human consciousness are made of this Spirit. The
aim of spiritual life was to unite human with cosmic consciousness. As a
romantic artist, Tagore strove to do this through art rather than through
meditation or mysticism: but in this he was extending the central Indian
tradition, not diverging from it.
Tagore’s love and knowledge of riverine Bengal sprang from a deeply
religious response to its natural beauties and human simplicity. He
needed to keep his distance, watch the rural scene through the windows
of his boat, because his response was essentially idealistic, springing
from his own religious needs rather than from practical or scientific
observation. When he writes of his love for the Padma river itself, in
letters or poems, he is writing not as a fisherman or scientist but as a
poet. His letters to Indira Devi are a kind of continuous song of praise –
padmār mahākābya, ‘an epic of the Padma’, as Pramathanath Bisi puts it
in his important study of Tagore’s short stories.1 In its movement, peace
and isolation, he found the freedom, solitude and solace that city life
and literary fame could never give him:
I’m now in the boat. It’s my own private home. Here I am my own master: here no one else has
any claim on me or my time. This boat is like an old dressing-gown: whenever I enter it I feel
relaxed and at leisure. I can think what I like, read what I like, write what I like, and if I want I
can put my feet on the table and sink myself in the wide, bright, lazy light of day… Even after
only one day, how different my mood is from what it is in Calcutta! Yesterday afternoon sitting
out on the roof I felt one way, and today sitting in the boat at noon I feel quite another way.
What might seem sentimental and poetical in Calcutta here seems totally real and true…2

Tagore is aware that there is an idealized aspect to his response to the
Padma scene, which from the city point of view might seem sentimental
or poetical; but for him the Ideal Spirit is just as real as the sukh and
duḥkh of ordinary material existence. The river is a symbol of ‘the spirit
that impels All thinking things, all objects of all thought, And rolls through
all things’ – through human life just as much as through the natural,
non-human world. Indeed, it is hard for an English reader not to be
reminded of Wordsworth. Mooring the boat at the small town of Pabna

on the way to Sajadpur, he watches the people on the ghāṭ as the sun
sets: he feels all the works, desires, hopes and conflicts of mankind as
notes of a single melody whose mood is unbearably still and sad as
darkness descends. This is the timeless Spirit that lies behind the sukhduhkh of mortal life:
The essence of the matter is this: that men are small and their lives are fleeting, yet the stream of
life, with its good and bad and its happiness and sadness, flows and will eternally flow with its
ancient solemn murmur. On the edge of the town and in the darkness of the evening that
constant murmuring sound can be heard.1

Furthermore, this prabāha (stream) is intimately bound up with Tagore’s
own creative life as well as with the laws of Nature and humanity. It was
in the 1890s that he began to express his profound sense of a jībandebatā (life-god) guiding, impelling and harmonizing all his creative and
practical endeavours. His book citrā (1896) includes a poem called jībandebatā, but the most thorough-going exposition of the concept is found
in an essay on his poetic development that he published in 1904 in a
collection of essays by various authors called baṅgabhāṣār lekhak
(‘Writers in the Bengali Language’). The essay – which quotes two of his
letters to Indira Devi2 – is an extreme statement of an inspirational,
deterministic theory of artistic creativity: the poet impelled by a God
who is himself a poet:
To this Poet, who fashions my life out of all my good and bad, strong and weak points, I have
given the name of jīban-debatā in my poetry. I do not just think that he forms all the separate
fragments of my being into a unity, so as to bring it into consonance with the universe; I also
believe he has brought me to this present life from some previous existence, via a strange stage of
forgetfulness; and that a strong memory (derived from his power) of my flowing journey through
the universe continues to remain subtly within me. That is why I feel so ancient a harmony with
the trees and animals and birds of this world; that is why I do not find the vastness and mystery
of the world either alien or terrifying.3

Such notions can be dangerous, giving the poet a ‘divine right’ beyond
criticism or self-criticism; perhaps it is a weakness in Tagore’s artistic
philosophy that he could never quite abandon them – though his
relationship with his jīban-debatā grew steadily more bewildered and
humble. The essay was criticized for its dambha o ahamikā (‘arrogance
and egotism’) by the poet and playwright Dvijendralal Ray (1863–1913),

and Tagore felt obliged to write a reply in the periodical baṅgadarśan.1
How does Tagore’s spiritual sense relate to the short stories? In what
way is the guiding hand of his jīban-debatā present in them? Stories as
rational and ironic as ‘Forbidden Entry’ or ‘A Problem Solved’ cannot
obviously or superficially be attributed to the motion of the Padma, or
‘the milk of paradise’.
For Tagore the Spirit has two main facets. On the one hand it is
enormously rich and ever-changing; it is powerful, frightening and
awesome as well as beautiful; and it manifests itself in the abundance
and creativity of Nature and the endless variety and complexity of
human life. On the other hand the Spirit is something very still, quiet
and simple. If we look at the poems of the 1890s we find both
dimensions. We find the first in energetic and elaborate poems such as
basundharā (‘Earth’); or Ūrbaśī – a paean to the courtesan of the gods; or
mānasundarī (‘Lady of the Mind’), in which the jīban-debatā is identified
with the Spirit of Poetry and is given the female form that Tagore always
henceforth preferred. The whole of his book kṣanikā (‘The Flitting One’,
1900) is devoted throughout to the evanescent, uncatchable nature of
the Spirit, expressed in a brilliant range of novel verse forms. But the
other, quieter side is conveyed in a poem such as acal sṃrti (‘Unmoving
Memory’) in sonār tari (1894), in which he speaks of a ‘still silence’ that
never leaves him, ‘a silent mountain peak’ ever present in his mind; or
dhyān (‘Meditation’) in caitāli, in which the same inner stillness is seen as
a single lotus floating on a calm sea. In other poems, and in chinnapatra,
beauty and happiness are seen as ultimately very simple. The famous
poem sukh in citrā describes a serene afternoon scene on the Padma and
concludes: mane hala sukh ati sahaj saral (‘I feel that Happiness is very
simple and easy’). In a letter, the refreshing beauty of the weather after
rain gives him the same feeling:
All my work and all my dealings with people feel very easy. Actually, everything is simple. There
is one straight road – if you open your eyes you can go along it. I don’t see the need to search for
all sorts of clever short cuts. Happiness and sadness are both on the road – there is no road that
avoids them – but peace is found only on this road, nowhere else.1

These two facets of the Spirit, the complex and the simple, are found in
the short stories just as they are in the poems and letters. In terms of

content, we find the former in rich descriptions of Nature – sometimes
beautiful, as in ‘The Postmaster’ or ‘Guest’, or when the adolescent
Nilkanta in ‘Unwanted’ awakens to the beauty of the river; sometimes
awesome – like the storm in ‘The Living and the Dead’, the brooding
valley in ‘The Hungry Stones’, the sandbanks at night at the end of ‘In
the Middle of the Night’, or Giribala’s sense of her own physical beauty
in ‘Fury Appeased’. There is especially significant symbolism at the end
of ‘A Single Night’: in the same way that the narrator is able to rise
above his humdrum existence in a moment of mystical communion with
the woman he should have married, so also the divisions of the land are
overwhelmed by the unity of the water, sthal by jal, world by Spirit.
Morality is transcended: indeed the Spirit in its complex form lies
beyond good and evil – it is a creative, evolutionary power, ‘the force
which through the green fuse drives the flower’. The Spirit in its simple
form, however, shows itself in qualities of human goodness: kindness,
sensitivity, simplicity, innocence, humility and love. The reader of the
stories in the present volume will find many characters with this simple,
spiritual quality of goodness, and this is how the Spirit enters the
content of even the most realistic and ironic stories. The subtlety of
Tagore’s perceptions and the depth of his sympathy is shown in the way
he discovers good qualities even in foolish or vain characters like
Baidyanath in ‘Fool’s Gold’, Taraprasanna in ‘Taraprasanna’s Fame’, or
hākurdā in the story of that name.
We need, however, to look further than the content of the stories, for
they are linked to Tagore’s perceptions of the Spirit at the deepest levels
of style and expression. In Tagore’s Bengali prose we find both
complexity and simplicity. On the one hand we have, in passages of
heightened description or feeling, long and elaborate sentences
unprecedented in Bengali prose; on the other hand we have a startlingly
direct, simple, sometimes almost bald manner of narration. It is the
latter quality that will probably strike the reader of my translations most
forcibly, as the music of Tagore’s long sentences, with their relatives and
correlatives, strings of participles, and parallelism of phrasing – at their
best, broad and grand as a Bengali river – requires its original
orchestration, whereas in the translation of his simple mode probably
less is lost. But perhaps an overall vitality and energy will be sensed,

running through all the stories; and perhaps their countervailing
simplicity will be felt, even in translation, not only as an aspect of their
realism, but of their poetry.
We have here the essence of the way in which Tagore expressed in his
stories the deep spiritual bond that he felt with rural Bengal. His realism
operated at the level of feeling rather than naturalism; his idealism at
the level of style and expression as well as content. When he writes with
such eloquence of the river, landscape and sky in his letters, we recall
not merely comparable descriptions in his stories but – in Bengali at
least – a general quality of rhythm, breadth and complexity in his prose
style. Similarly it is not so much the touching goodness of particular
characters as a general quality of honesty, directness and innocence in
the writing that is associated with accounts in his letters such as this:
Sometimes one or two old, simple, devoted tenants come: their devotion is so unaffected, they
seem to love me so truly that tears come to my eyes. Recently an old tenant came to me with his
son: he took the dust of my feet with, so it seemed, all the simple tenderness of his heart. In the
Bhagavata Krishna says, ‘My devotees are greater than I am.’ I can understand that idea a little
now. Truly in his beautiful simplicity and heartfelt devotion this man is much larger than I am.1

Maybe, as Tagore himself admitted, from the city standpoint this does
seem sentimental, but it is something that those who know Bengali
villages can still find – a quality that Tagore felt in the Padma region and
tried to convey in stories that were, as he put it, ‘full of the temperament
of the rural people’. After all, many of his characters are neither rural
nor innocent; yet simplicity and innocence in the writing is nearly always
present.

ghāṭe (at the ghāṭ)
Why did the goodness of the old tenant described above bring tears to
Tagore’s eyes? And why are so many tears shed in the stories? Or why,
even if the tears are not described, do we know that they are being shed
– by Raicharan at the end of ‘Little Master’s Return’; by the narrator in
‘The Editor’; by Nilkanta at the end of ‘Unwanted’?
ghāte is the third of the headings that Tagore used for his selection of

letters in bicitra prabandha. A ghāṭ can be the steps down to a tank or
pond, not necessarily a river, but in the context of riverine Bengal the
ghāṭ is more than just a place where people bathe, wash clothes and
utensils and gossip; it is also a mooring-place, a place of arrival and
departure, of welcome and farewell. In Tagore’s letters, stories and
poems, the ghāt usually has poignant associations. Many examples could
be given. In one of Tagore’s earliest short stories, ghāter kathā (‘The
ghāt’s Story’), published in the journal bhāratī in 1884 when he was
twenty-three, the ghāt itself narrates the sad history of Kusum, a girl who
often comes to the ghāt to gossip with friends. She goes away to get
married, and returns as a young widow. An attractive sannyāsī (holy
man) comes and stays in the village, gathering a circle of devotees:
Kusum attends to him. She has a dream in which he is transformed into
her lover. She tells him about the dream. Gently – and with a hint that
the feelings between them are mutual – the sannyāsī tells her he must go,
and she must forget him. After he has gone, Kusum descends the steps
slowly saying, ‘He has told me to forget him’, and drowns herself. In
chinnapatra, there is a letter describing a young bride standing at the
ghāt and trying to bring herself to leave:
At last when it was time to leave I saw them trying to coax that girl, with her cropped hair and
big round armlets and bright and innocent beauty, to get on to the boat; but she didn’t want to
go. Eventually they managed, with great difficulty, to pull her aboard. I realized that the poor
girl was probably going from her father’s house to her husband’s. When the boat set sail, the
other women stood watching from the bank: one or two of them were gently wiping tears away
from their noses with the ends of their saris…1

It was an incident that obviously made a special impression on Tagore:
in interviews on the stories he cited it as a source for samāpti (‘The
Conclusion’ – not included in the present volume).2 Of all the stories it is
perhaps ‘The Postmaster’ that makes the most haunting connection
between the ghāṭ and poignant leave-taking; but here there is a
difference between the grief of Ratan and the melancholy reflections of
the postmaster himself. Hers is real, live, human loss and rejection –
duḥkh – but his is more metaphysical: the current as it carries him away
makes him udāsīn, detached; and it is this kind of mood – alienation
rather than grief – that many passages in the letters seem to link with
the ghāṭ, with its meeting yet separation of land and water, world and

Spirit. There is a letter, for example, that Tagore included under the
ghāte heading in bicitra prabandha and whose mood was likened by his
biographer Prabhat Kumar Mukherjee to his most famous single poem of
the 1890s, sonār tarī (‘The Golden Boat’).3 Tagore describes the scene at
the Sajadpur ghāṭ in the heat of midday in June, with a market on one
side and crowds of boats on the other; he notices the way the day’s work
and movement is subdued by the heat but still goes on, and then writes:
I was thinking, why is there such a deep note of mourning in the fields, ghāṭs, sky and sunshine
of our country? I think perhaps the reason is that Nature is constantly before our eyes: the wide,
open sky, flat and endless land, shimmering sunshine – and in the midst of this men come and
go, crossing to and fro like a ferry-boat. The little noises that they make, the ups and downs of
their happy or sad efforts in the market of the world, seem in the context of this endlessly
reaching, huge, aloof Nature so small, so fleeting, so futile and full of suffering! We feel in
Nature’s effortless, unambitious stillness and serenity such vast, beautiful, undistorted, generous
Peace; and compared to that such an effortful, agonized, tormented, petty, perpetually unstable
lack of peace inside ourselves, that when we look at the distant blue line of the shady woods on
the river-bank we are strangely unsettled. Where Nature is swathed and cramped by mist and
snow and dark clouds, man feels in command, feels that his work can leave a permanent mark:
he looks towards ‘posterity’,1 he builds monuments, writes biographies and erects huge stone
memorials over dead bodies…2

The contrast between India and Europe is significant here, and crops up
elsewhere in the letters. Woken up on his houseboat by the noise of the
river, Tagore sits and stares out at the dimly moonlit night, and the day
seems unreal; but when he gets up in the morning, the night seems
remote and dreamlike:
If one sits up in the middle of the night and looks out at the scene, the world and one’s own self
seem to take on a new existence – the daytime world of contact with other people seems false.
But when I got up this morning, my night-time world seemed distant and dreamlike and
insubstantial. For man, both these worlds are real, but they are very different. To my mind, the
daytime world is like European music – consonant and dissonant bits and pieces are combined to
produce an overall harmony. And the night-time world is like our Indian music – a pure,
poignant, solemn, unmixed rāga. We are stirred and moved by both, yet they are opposed to each
other. What can be done? At the root of existence there is a conflict, an opposition; everything
divided between the King and the Queen, day and night, variety and unity, time and eternity. We
Indians live in the kingdom of the Night – we are attuned to eternity and unity. Our melodies are
lonely and single; Europe’s music is social and communal. By our songs the listener is taken
beyond the limits of day-to-day happiness and sadness to a companionless, detached world at the
root of the universe; and European music takes us on a marvellous dance through the endless
fluctuations of human happiness and sadness.3

From letters like this, and from stories and poems contemporary with
them, we can draw up a list of opposites which seem to lie at the back of
much of Tagore’s thinking at this time:
India

Europe

Night

Day

Country

Town

Padma

Calcutta

Single-line music

Harmonic music

Solitude

Crowd

Silence

Noise

Spirit

World

Female

Male

Child

Adult

Imagination

Pragmatism

Sensitivity

Cruelty

Poetry

Prose

Idealism

Realism

Peace

sukh-duḥkh

jal

sthal

Unity

Division

Eternity

Time

Pramathanath Bisi in his study of Tagore’s short stories notices a tension
between ‘a longing to enter the human world of happiness and sadness,
meeting and parting, and a longing to rove freely in a world of
unfettered beauty’.1 The former mainly finds expression in the stories,

the latter in the poems: but Pramathanath stresses that they are not
‘watertight compartments’, and neither are the opposites listed above.
As we have seen, both are present in the stories – the realism of sthal
and the idealism of jal. Tagore’s ultimate artistic and spiritual goal was
to reconcile realism with idealism: in My Reminiscences he defined this
goal as ‘the subject on which all my writings have dwelt – the joy of
attaining the Infinite within the finite’.2 There are many poems and
songs where it is achieved, where the sukh-duḥkh of mortal life is
perfectly in harmony with the Spirit that ‘rolls through all things’. Is it
achieved in the short stories?
Once again, one needs to distinguish between the content and the art
of the stories. The essence of their content seems to be a conflict, not a
harmony, of Real and Ideal, sthal and jal. They belong to the ghāṭ, to the
meeting-place of land and water, a place more often than not of sorrow
and tears. His characters weep because of a conflict between goodness
and cruelty, innocence and the world, sensitivity and insensitivity, depth
and shallowness. Sensitive characters (Ratan in ‘The Postmaster’,
Ṭhākurdā’s granddaughter, Banamali in ‘The Divide’, Nirupama in ‘Profit
and Loss’, Shashikala in ‘Elder Sister’, Nilkanta in ‘Unwanted’, and many
more) weep because their feelings have been hurt; insensitive characters
– those who have the potential for change and growth, like the narrators
of ‘Ṭhākurdā, ‘Kabuliwallah’ or ‘Thoughtlessness’ – weep when they
realize that their actions have been at odds with kindness and goodness.
The sky weeps heavy monsoon tears in ‘Housewife’, ‘Thoughtlessness’,
‘Holiday’ or ‘A Single Night’: as if in sympathy with the tension that
must always exist between division and unity, cruelty and goodness,
world and Spirit.
At the more factual and historical level of content, too, we find that
many stories hinge on a conflict between one or more of the pairs of
opposites in the list above: between modern, Westernized values and
traditional patterns of life – with Tagore sometimes sympathizing with
the former (on child-marriage or female education, for example),
sometimes with the latter (on, say, older patterns of landlord–tenant
relationship in ‘A Problem Solved’), sometimes holding himself ironically
and quizzically aloof. Mary Lago, in her study of the stories, sees them
essentially as a product of the clash between the new and the old (‘town

and country’), that characterized the evolution of nineteenth-century
Bengal.1 But what of the art of the stories? Do we find in them a
balanced reconciliation of opposites, or an uneasy forced marriage?
Tagore’s art is a vulnerable art. Nearly all his writings are vulnerable
to criticism, philistinism or contempt, because of his willingness to wear
his heart on his sleeve, to take on themes that other writers would find
grandiose, sentimental or embarrassing, and his refusal to cloak his
utterances in cleverness, urbanity or double-talk. The fact that his works
are so difficult to translate has made him doubly vulnerable to criticism
by foreigners able to read him only in bad translations. By the same
token, Bengalis have become fiercely protective towards him, and find it
as difficult to face up to flaws and failings in him as parents do in a
much-loved, vulnerable child. He himself lacked self-criticism, and was
hypersensitive to the often harsh criticism he received from his
compatriots.1 His short stories are his most vulnerable productions of all,
and some of them attracted scathing comments when they first
appeared. Here is Sureshchandra Samajpati, editor of sāhitya, writing
about niśīthe (‘In the Middle of the Night’), after its publication in
sādhanā in 1894:
‘Nisīthe’ is a short story. The story is utterly lacking in narrative skill; only in its beauty of
language and wealth of description is it attractive. But sad to say, its language and rhetoric are
not put to any meaningful purpose. The zamindar Dakshinacharan Babu knocks on the door of a
doctor’s house in the middle of the night shouting, ‘Doctor! Doctor!’ This is how the story begins.
It’s hard to find any reason why he should wake up the doctor at such an hour to tell him his lifestory. It is also unlikely that Dakshina Babu would be able to speak with such linguistic and
rhetorical skill at half past two in the morning. No one telling his life-story would give such
minutely detailed pictures of scenes of so long ago, in the fine language of a poet: the pure white
moonlight, the darkness, the night sounds, the fragrance, the sighs, etc. If Dakshinacharan were a
sentimental poet, one might forgive him for it. But unfortunately he comes across as no more
than a yātrā-actor with a good memory. He is merely reciting, at half past two in the morning, to
meet the thirst of readers of sādhanā for short stories, lines which the author has given him. The
story falls down because of the writer’s lack of story-telling skill and inability to perceive what
might be plausible, but it has to be praised for the way in which he handles language. Why waste
such skill on something so worthless? It’s hard to see clearly which part of the mystery of human
existence he wishes to depict.2

It was this kind of thing, presumably, that drove Tagore to abandon the
editorship of sādhanā and give up writing stories completely in 1896 and
1897.

Tagore’s comments on his stories later in life show that he was aware
of their weaknesses. He knew that not all of them would bear
comparison with the best European stories – especially the French and
Russian writers who were by then available to him in translation but
were scarcely so in Calcutta in the 1890s. He defended himself by
pointing out that he had to play the demanding role of a pioneer in the
art of writing short stories in Bengali. In his interview with Buddhadeva
Bose he said:
You speak about my language, and say that even in my prose I am a poet. But if my language
sometimes goes beyond what is appropriate in a story, you can’t blame me for that, for I had to
create my Bengali prose myself. My language was not there, heaped-up and ready-made… I had
to create the prose of my stories as I went along. You often speak of Maupassant and other
foreign writers: their language was already made for them. If they had had to create their
language as they wrote, I wonder how they would have fared.1

It is not of course true that there was no Bengali prose to speak of before
Tagore: Bankimchandra Chatterjee was a master stylist, even if his dry,
compact style was not a model that the lyrically inclined Tagore could
naturally adopt. It is also a fact that other Bengali writers started to
write short stories at the same time as Tagore – particularly
Nagendranath Gupta (1861–1940) – so Tagore was not totally alone.2
But he was the first Bengali writer to think of the short story as a serious
art-form, rather than merely as an entertaining way to fill up the pages
of periodicals; the first to write about real, contemporary life rather than
romanticized history or myth; and although some British and American
models were available to him – and his brother Jyotirindranath perhaps
gave him some acquaintance with French – the manner and provenance
of Western short stories were really too remote from Bengal to be of
much relevance. Some have argued that his ‘supernatural’ stories were
influenced by Edgar Allan Poe and Théophile Gautier: one recent
debunking critic has accused him of actually lifting material for ‘In the
Middle of the Night’ and ‘The Hungry Stones’ from Poe’s ‘Ligeia’ and
Gautier’s ‘The Mummy’s Foot’.1 But a taste for the macabre and ghostly
had long been fostered in Bengal by folk-tales, and Tagore’s direct and
straightforward manner of story-telling seems worlds apart from
European fin de siècle.
Even if there had been a mature tradition of short-story-writing in

Bengali, and even if the great French and Russian masters had been
available to him as models, his stories would probably still have been
vulnerable, would still have mixed the perceptive with the naïve, the
realistic with the idealized, the rhetorical with the plain, the
sophisticated with the jejune. His nature demanded it. He was never a
writer who could learn from others: his own, unique literary demon, his
jīban-debatā, had too relentless a grip on him. His stories – not only in
their content but in their overall character and ‘feel’ – belong not wholly
to the prosaic real, not wholly to the poetic ideal either, but to the ghāt
where the two meet: sometimes happily (for the ghāt is a place of
welcome and home-coming as well as parting), sometimes more
uneasily. They leave us, I would say, with a sense of uncertainty: with
the cry of the mad Meher Ali in ‘The Hungry Stones’ (‘Keep away! All is
false!’) ringing in our ears as well as the song of love that Uma in
‘Exercise-book’ hears; with the rattle of the empty treasure-jar in ‘Fool’s
Gold’ as well as Tarapada’s flute-music in ‘Guest’. The reconciliation at
the end of ‘The Gift of Sight’, between a wife whose blindness takes her
deep into her Indian soul and a husband whose medical career takes him
far away from his, is not, perhaps, total – but Tagore would be a much
less valuable writer if it was. His blend of poetry and prose is all the
more truthful for being incomplete.
1990

The Living and the Dead
I
The widow living with the zamindar Sharadashankar’s family, in the big
house at Ranihat, had no blood-relatives left. One by one they had died.
In her husband’s family, too, there was no one she could call her own,
having no husband or son. But there was a little boy – her brother-inlaw’s son – who was the apple of her eye. His mother had been very ill
for a long time after his birth, so his Aunt Kadambini had brought him
up. Anyone who brings up someone else’s son becomes specially
devoted: there are no rights, no social claims – nothing but ties of
affection. Affection cannot prove itself with a legal document; nor does it
wish to. All it can do is love with doubled intensity, because it owns so
uncertainly.
Kadambini poured her frustrated widow’s love on to this boy, till one
night in Śrābaṇ she suddenly died. For some strange reason her
heartbeat stopped. Everywhere else, Time continued; yet in this one,
small, tender, loving heart its clock’s tick ceased. Keeping the matter
quiet, in case the police took notice, four Brahmin employees of the
zamindar quickly carried off the body to be burnt.
The cremation-ground at Ranihat was a long way from human
habitation. There was a hut on the edge of a tank there, and next to it an
immense banyan tree: nothing else at all on the wide open plain.
Formerly a river had flowed here – the tank had been made by digging
out part of the dried-up course of the river. The local people now
regarded this tank as a sacred spring. The four men placed the corpse
inside the hut and sat down to wait for the wood for the pyre to arrive.
The wait seemed so long that they grew restless: Nitai and Gurucharan
went off to see why the firewood was so long coming, while Bidhu and
Banamali sat guarding the corpse.
It was a dark monsoon night. The clouds were swollen; not a star
could be seen in the sky. The two men sat silently in the dark hut. One

of them had matches and a candle, wrapped up in his chadar. They
could not get the matches to light in the damp air, and the lantern they
had brought with them had gone out as well. After sitting in silence for a
long time, one of them said, ‘I could do with a puff of tobacco, bhāi. We
forgot everything in the rush.’
‘I’ll run and get some,’ said the other. ‘I won’t be a minute.’
‘That’s nice!’ said Bidhu, perceiving his motive. ‘I suppose I’m to stay
here on my own?’
They fell silent again. Five minutes seemed like an hour. They began
inwardly to curse the two who had gone to trace the firewood – no
doubt they were sitting comfortably somewhere having a smoke and
chatting. They were soon convinced that this must be so. There was no
sound anywhere – just the steady murmur of crickets and frogs round
the tank. Suddenly the bed seemed to stir a little, as if the dead body had
turned on to its side. Bidhu and Banamali began to shudder and mutter
prayers. Next moment a long sigh was heard: the two immediately fled
outside and ran off towards the village.
A couple of miles along the path they met their two companions
returning with lanterns in their hands. They had actually just been for a
smoke, and had found out nothing about the firewood. They claimed it
was being chopped up now and would not be long coming. Bidhu and
Banamali then described what had happened in the hut. Nitai and
Gurucharan dismissed this as nonsense, and rebuked the other two
angrily for deserting their post.
The four of them swiftly returned to the hut at the cremation-ground.
When they went in, they found that the corpse had gone: the bed was
empty. They stared at one another. Could jackals have made off with it?
But even the garment that covered it had gone. Searching about outside
the hut they noticed in a patch of mud by the door some recent, small,
woman’s footprints.
The zamindar, Sharadashankar, was not a fool: to try to tell him a
ghost-story would get them nowhere. After long discussion, the four
decided they had best say simply that the cremation had taken place.
When, towards dawn, the wood arrived at last, those who brought it
were told that in view of the delay the job had already been done, using

firewood stored in the hut. They had no reason to doubt this. A dead
body was not a valuable object: why should anyone wish to steal it?

II
It is well known that an apparently lifeless body can harbour dormant
life which in time may bring the body back to life. Kadambini had not
died: for some reason, her life-function had been suspended – that was
all.
When she regained consciousness, she saw dense darkness all around
her. She realized that the place where she was lying was not her usual
bedroom. She called out ‘Didi’ once, but no one in the dark room replied.
She sat up in alarm, recalling her death-bed – that sudden pain in her
chest, the choking for breath. Her eldest sister-in-law had been squatting
in a corner of the room warming her little son’s milk on a stove –
Kadambini had collapsed on to the bed, no longer able to stand.
Gasping, she had called, ‘Didi, bring the little boy to me – I think I’m
dying.’ Then everything had gone black, as if an inkpot had been poured
over a page of writing. Kadambini’s entire memory and consciousness,
all the letters in her book of life, became at that moment
indistinguishable. She had no recollection of whether her nephew had
called out ‘Kākimā’ for the last time, in his sweet loving voice; whether
she had been given that final viaticum of love, to sustain her as she
travelled from the world she knew, along Death’s strange and endless
path.
Her first feeling was that the land of death must be one of total
darkness and desolation. There was nothing to see there, nothing to
hear, nothing to do except sit and wait, forever awake. Then she
suddenly felt a chilly, rainy wind through an open door, and heard the
croaking of monsoon frogs; and all her memories of the monsoon, from
childhood right through her short life, rose in her mind. She felt the
touch of the world again. There was a flash of lightning: for an instant
the tank, the banyan tree, the vast plain and a distant row of trees
showed themselves before her eyes. She remembered how she had
sometimes bathed in the tank on sacred occasions; how seeing dead

bodies in the cremation-ground there had made her aware of the
awesomeness of death.
Her immediate idea was that she should return home. But then she
thought, ‘I’m not alive – they won’t take me back. It would be a curse on
them. I am exiled from the land of the living – I am my own ghost.’ If
that were not so, how had she come at dead of night from the safe inner
quarters of Sharadashankar’s house to this remote cremation-ground?
But if her funeral rites had not yet been completed, then what had
become of the people who should have burned her? She recalled her last
moments before dying, in the well-lit Sharadashankar residence; then,
finding herself alone in this distant, deserted, dark cremation-ground,
she again said to herself, ‘I no longer belong to the world of living
people. I am fearsome, a bringer of evil; I am my own ghost.’
As this realization struck, all ties and conventions seemed to snap. It
was as if she had weird power, boundless liberty – to go where she liked,
do what she liked; and with the onset of this feeling she dashed out of
the hut like a madwoman, like a gust of wind – ran out into the dark
burning-ground with not the slightest shame, fear or worry in her mind.
But her legs were tired as she walked, and her body began to weaken.
The plain stretched on endlessly, with paddy-fields here and there and
knee-deep pools of water. As dawn broke slowly, village bamboo-groves
could be seen, and one or two birds called. She now felt very afraid. She
had no idea where she stood in the world, what her relation to living
people would be. So long as she was in the wide open plain, in the
burning-ground, in the darkness of the Srābaṇ night, she remained
fearless, as if in her own realm. Daylight and human habitation were
what terrified her. Men fear ghosts, but ghosts fear men: they are two
separate races, living on opposite sides of the river of death.

III
Wandering around at night like a madwoman, with her mud-smeared
clothes and weird demeanour, Kadambini would have terrified anyone,
and boys would probably have run away and thrown pebbles at her from
a distance. Fortunately the first passer-by to see her in this condition was

a gentleman.
‘Mā,’ he said, approaching her, ‘you look as though you come from a
good family: where are you going to, alone on the road like this?’
At first Kadambini did not reply, and merely stared blankly at him.
She felt totally at a loss. That she was out in the world, that she looked
well-born, that a passer-by was asking her questions – all this was
beyond her grasp.
The gentleman spoke again. ‘Come along, Mā, I’ll take you home. Tell
me where you live.’
Kadambini began to think. She could not imagine returning to her inlaws’ house, and she had no parental home; but then she remembered
her childhood friend Yogmaya. Although she had not seen her since
childhood, they had sometimes exchanged letters. At times there had
been an affectionate rivalry between them, with Kadambini asserting
that nothing was greater than her love for Yogmaya, while Yogmaya
suggested that Kadambini was not responding sufficiently to her own
affection. But neither doubted that if opportunity to meet arose again,
neither would wish to lose sight of the other. ‘I’m going to
Shripaticharan’s house at Nishindapur,’ said Kadambini to the
gentleman.
The man was going to Calcutta. Nishindapur was not near by, but it
was not out of his way. He personally saw Kadambini to Shripaticharan
Babu’s house.
The two friends were a little slow to recognize each other, but soon
their eyes lit up as each saw a childhood resemblance in the other. ‘Well
I never,’ said Yogmaya. ‘I never thought that I would see you again. But
what brings you here? Did your in-laws kick you out?’
Kadambini was silent at first, then said, ‘Bhāi, don’t ask me about my
in-laws. Give me a corner in your house, as a servant. I’ll work for you.’
‘What an idea!’ said Yogmaya. ‘How can you be a servant? You’re my
friend, you’re like –’ and so on. Then Shripati came into the room.
Kadambini gazed at him for a moment, then slowly walked out, without
covering her head or showing any other sign of modesty or respect.
Afraid that Shripati would take offence at her friend’s behaviour,
Yogmaya made apologies for her. But so little explanation was necessary

– indeed, Shripati accepted her excuses so easily – that she felt uneasy.
Kadambini joined her friend’s household, but she could not be
intimate with her – Death stood between them. If one doubts or is
conscious of oneself, one cannot unite with another. Kadambini looked
at Yogmaya as if she and her house and husband were in a different,
distant world. ‘They are people of the world,’ she felt, ‘with their loves
and feelings and duties, and I am an empty shadow. They are in the land
of the living, whereas I belong to Eternity.’
Yogmaya was also puzzled, could not understand anything. Women
cannot bear mystery, for this reason: that poetry, heroism or learning
can thrive on uncertainty but household arts cannot. Therefore women
thrust aside what they don’t understand, maintaining no connection with
it, or else they replace it with something they themselves have made –
something more useful. If they cannot do either of these, they get angry.
The more impenetrable Kadambini became, the more resentful Yogmaya
became towards her, wondering why she had been burdened with such
trouble.
There was a further problem. Kadambini was terrified of herself. Yet
she could not run away from herself. Those who are frightened of ghosts
look backwards in terror – they are frightened of what they cannot see.
But Kadambini was terrified of her inner self – nothing outside
frightened her. Thus, in the silence of midday, she would sit alone in her
room and sometimes shout out loud; and in the evening, the sight of her
shadow in the lamplight made her quiver all over. Everyone in the house
was alarmed by her fear. The maids and servants and Yogmaya herself
began to see ghosts all over the place. Eventually, in the middle of the
night, Kadambini came out of her bedroom, wailing; she came right up
to the door of Yogmaya’s room and cried, ‘Didi, Didi, I beg you! Do not
leave me alone!’
Yogmaya was as angry as she was frightened. She would have driven
Kadambini out of the house, there and then. The kindly Shripati, with
great effort, managed to calm Kadambini down and settle her in an
adjoining room.
The next day Shripati received an unexpected summons from the
inner part of the house. Yogmaya burst into a torrent of accusation: ‘So!
A fine man you are. A woman leaves her own husband’s home and takes

up residence in your house – months have gone by but she shows no sign
of leaving – and I’ve heard not the slightest objection from you. What
are you thinking of? You men are a fine lot.’
In fact, of course, men are unthinkingly weak about women, and
women can accuse them all the more because of this. Even if he had
been willing to swear on his life that his concern for the pathetic yet
beautiful Kadambini was no more than was proper, his behaviour
suggested otherwise. He had said to himself, ‘The people in her
husband’s house must have treated this childless widow with great
injustice and cruelty, so that she was forced to flee and take refuge with
me. She has no father or mother – so how can I desert her?’ He had
refrained from inquiring about her background, not wishing to upset her
by questioning her on this unwelcome subject. But his wife was now
objecting strongly to his passive, charitable attitude; and he realized he
would have to inform Kadambini’s in-laws of her whereabouts, if he was
to keep the peace in his household. In the end he decided it would not
be fruitful to write a letter; it would be better to go to Ranihat
personally to find out what he could.
Shripati set off, and Yogmaya went to Kadambini and said, ‘My dear,
it doesn’t seem advisable for you to stay here any more. What will
people say?’
‘I have no connection with people,’ said Kadambini, looking solemnly
at Yogmaya.
Yogmaya was nonplussed. ‘You may not have,’ she said irritably, ‘but
we have. How can we go on putting up someone else’s widow?’
‘Where is my husband’s house?’ said Kadambini.
‘Hell!’ thought Yogmaya. ‘What is the woman on about?’
‘Who am I to you?’ said Kadambini slowly. ‘Am I of this world? All of
you here smile, weep, love, possess things; I merely look on. You are
human beings; I am a shadow. I do not understand why God has put me
in your midst. You’re worried that I’ll damage your happiness – I in turn
cannot understand what my relation is to you. But since the Almighty
has kept no other place for the likes of me, I shall wander round you and
haunt you even if you cut me off.’
Her stare and the tone of her words were such that Yogmaya

understood their import, even if she did not understand them literally
and was unable to reply. She could not manage any more questions.
Gloomy and oppressed, she left the room.

IV
Shripati did not return from Ranihat until nearly ten at night. The whole
world seemed awash with torrential rain. With its thudding sound, it
gave the impression that it would never end, that the night would never
end.
‘What happened?’ asked Yogmaya.
‘It’s a long story,’ said Shripati. ‘I’ll tell you later.’ He took off his wet
clothes, had something to eat and after smoking for a bit went to bed.
He seemed very preoccupied. Yogmaya suppressed her curiosity all this
while, but when she got into bed she asked, ‘What did you find out? Tell
me.’
‘You are certainly mistaken,’ said Shripati.
Yogmaya was rather annoyed at this. Women do not make mistakes,
or if they do men are wiser not to mention them; it is safest to let them
pass without complaining. ‘In what way?’ asked Yogmaya heatedly.
‘The woman you have accepted into your house,’ said Shripati, ‘is not
your friend Kadambini.’
Such a remark – especially from one’s husband – might reasonably
cause offence. ‘So I don’t know my own friend?’ said Yogmaya. ‘I have to
wait for you to identify her? What an absurd thing to say!’
Shripati replied that its absurdity or otherwise was not the point:
proof was what counted. There was no doubt whatsoever that
Kadambini had died.
‘Listen,’ said Yogmaya. ‘You’ve got into a complete muddle. Whatever
you heard in whatever place you went to can’t be right. Who asked you
to go anyway? If you had written a letter, everything would have been
made clear.’
Distressed by his wife’s lack of confidence in his efficiency, Shripati
started to explain all the proofs in detail – but to no avail. They went on

arguing into the small hours. Shripati believed their guest had been
deceiving his wife all this time, and Yogmaya believed she had deserted
her family; so both were agreed that Kadambini should be evicted from
the house immediately. But neither was willing to admit defeat in the
argument. Their voices rose higher and higher, and they forgot that
Kadambini was lying in the next room.
‘It’s a terrible thing,’ said one voice. ‘I heard what happened with my
own ears.’
‘How can I accept that?’ shouted the other. ‘I can see her with my own
eyes.’
Eventually Yogmaya said, ‘All right, tell me when Kadambini died.’
She hoped, by finding a discrepancy with the date of one of Kadambini’s
letters, to prove that Shripati was wrong. But they worked out that the
date given to Shripati was exactly one day before Kadambini had come
to their house. Yogmaya felt a racing in her heart at this, and Shripati
too began to feel unnerved. Suddenly the door of their room blew open,
and a damp wind put out their lamp. The darkness outside instantly
filled their whole room from floor to ceiling. Kadambini came and stood
right inside their room. It was half past two in the morning: the rain
outside was relentless.
‘Friend,’ said Kadambini, ‘I am your Kadambini, but I am no longer
alive. I am dead.’
Yogmaya yelled out in terror; Shripati was speechless.
‘But other than being dead, what harm have I done to you? If I have
no place in this world, or in the next world, then where shall I go?’ And
again, in the rain and the night, as if to wake God from his sleep, she
screamed, ‘Oh, tell me, where shall I go?’ Then, leaving the
dumbfounded husband and wife in the dark house, Kadambini fled in
search of her place in or beyond the world.

V
It is hard to say how Kadambini returned to Ranihat. She did not show
herself to anyone at first: she spent the whole day, without food, in a
ruined deserted temple. When evening came – early, as it does in the

monsoon, and oppressively dark – and the villagers, fearing a storm, had
retreated into their houses, Kadambini emerged on to the road again. As
she approached her in-laws’ house, her heart started to pound; but she
pulled her heavy veil round her head like a servant, and the gate-keepers
did not prevent her from entering. Meanwhile the rain had come on
even harder, and the wind blew more fiercely.
The mistress of the house – Sharadashankar’s wife – was playing cards
with her widowed sister-in-law. The maid was in the kitchen, and the
little boy was lying in the bedroom, sleeping after a bout of fever.
Kadambini entered the bedroom, without anyone noticing. It was
impossible to say why she had returned to her in-laws’ house – she
herself did not know why – but she knew that she wanted to see the
little boy again. She gave no thought to where she would go after that,
or what would happen to her.
She saw, in the lamplight, the thin, frail little boy lying asleep with his
fists clenched. Her racing heart thirsted when she saw him: how she
longed to clasp him to her breast one last time, to protect him from all
misfortune! But then she thought, ‘Now that I am not here, who will
look after him? His mother loves company, gossiping, playing cards; for
a long time she was happy to leave him in my care; she never had to
bother with his upbringing. Who will take care of him, as I did?’ The
little boy suddenly turned over and, half-asleep, said, ‘Kākimā, give me
some water.’ ‘O my darling,’ she inwardly replied, ‘my treasure: you
haven’t yet forgotten your Kākimā.’ At once she poured out some water
from the pitcher and, raising him up against her breast, helped him to
drink.
While he remained half-asleep, the little boy showed no surprise at
taking water from his aunt as he had been used to doing. But when
Kadambini – fulfilling her longstanding desire – kissed him, and then
laid him down again, he came out of his sleep and hugged her, asking,
‘Kākimā, did you die?’
‘Yes, my darling,’ she said.
‘Have you come back to me? You won’t die again?’
Before she could reply an uproar broke out: a maid had come into the
room with a bowl of sago in her hand, but had then screamed and fallen
down in a faint. Hearing her scream, Sharadashankar’s wife dropped her

cards and came running: she stiffened like wood when she was in the
room, unable either to flee or utter a word. Seeing all this, the boy
himself took fright. ‘Kākimā, you must go,’ he said, wailing.
Kadambini felt for the first time now that she had not died. The
ancient house, everything in it, the little boy, his affection – they were
all equally alive to her; there was no gulf intervening between her and
them. When she had been in her friend’s house she had felt dead, felt
that the person whom her friend had known had died. But now that she
was in her nephew’s room, she realized that his Kākimā had never died
at all.
‘Didi,’ she said pathetically, ‘why are you frightened of me? See – I am
just as I was.’
Her sister-in-law could not keep her balance any longer; she collapsed
unconscious.
Informed by his sister, Sharadashankar Babu himself came into the
inner quarters. Clasping his hands he begged, ‘Sister-in-law, it is not
right of you to do this. Shatish is the only son in the family: why are you
casting your eye on him? Are we strangers to you? Ever since you went,
he has wasted away day by day; he has been constantly ill, calling out
“Kākimā, Kākimā” day and night. Now that you have bid farewell to the
world, please stop attaching yourself to him, please go away – we’ll
perform your proper funerary rites.’
Kadambini could bear no more. She screamed out, ‘I did not die, I did
not die, I tell you! How can I make you understand – I did not die! Can’t
you see: I am alive.’ She seized the bell-metal bowl that had been
dropped on the ground and dashed it against her brow: blood gushed out
from the impact. ‘See here, I am alive!’
Sharadashankar stood like a statue; the little boy whimpered for his
father; the two stricken women lay on the ground. Crying out, ‘I did not
die, I did not die, I did not die,’ Kadambini fled from the room and down
the stairs, and threw herself into the tank in the inner courtyard of the
house. Sharadashankar heard, from the upper floor, a splashing sound.
It went on raining all night, and it was still raining the next morning;
even in the afternoon there was no let-up. Kadambini had proved, by
dying, that she had hot died.

The Postmaster
For his first job, the postmaster came to the village of Ulapur. It was a
very humble village. There was an indigo-factory near by, and the
British manager had with much effort established a new post office.
The postmaster was a Calcutta boy – he was a fish out of water in a
village like this. His office was in a dark thatched hut; there was a pond
next to it, scummed over with weeds, and jungle all around. The indigo
agents and employees had hardly any spare time, and were not suitable
company for an educated man. Or rather, his Calcutta background made
him a bad mixer – in an unfamiliar place he was either arrogant or ill-atease. So there was not much contact between him and the residents in
the area.
But he had very little work to do. Sometimes he tried to write poems.
The bliss of spending one’s life watching the leaves trembling in the
trees or the clouds in the sky – that was what the poems expressed. God
knew, however, that if a genie out of an Arab tale had come and cut
down all the leafy trees overnight, made a road, and blocked out the sky
with rows of tall buildings, this half-dead, well-bred young man would
have come alive again.
The postmaster’s salary was meagre. He had to cook for himself, and
an orphaned village-girl did housework for him in return for a little
food. Her name was Ratan, and she was about twelve or thirteen. It
seemed unlikely that she would get married. In the evenings, when
smoke curled up from the village cowsheds, crickets grated in the
bushes, a band of intoxicated Baul singers in a far village sang raucously
to drums and cymbals, and even a poet if seated alone on a dark
verandah might have shuddered a little at the trembling leaves, the
postmaster would go inside, light a dim lamp in a corner of the room
and call for Ratan. Ratan would be waiting at the door for this, but she
did not come at the first call – she would call back, ‘What is it,
Dadababu, what do you want?’
‘What are you doing?’ the postmaster would say.

‘I must go and light the kitchen fire –’
‘You can do your kitchen work later. Get my hookah ready for me.’
Soon Ratan came in, puffing out her cheeks as she blew on the bowl of
the hookah. Taking it from her, the postmaster would say abruptly, ‘So,
Ratan, do you remember your mother?’ She had lots to tell him: some
things she remembered, others she did not. Her father loved her more
than her mother did – she remembered him a little. He used to come
home in the evening after working hard all day, and one or two evenings
were clearly etched in her memory. As she talked, Ratan edged nearer to
the postmaster, and would end up sitting on the ground at his feet. She
remembered her little brother: one distant day, during the rainy season,
they had stood on the edge of a small pond and played at catching fish
with sticks broken off trees – this memory was far more vividly fixed in
her mind than many more important things. Sometimes these
conversations went on late into the night, and the postmaster then felt
too sleepy to cook. There would be some vegetable curry left over from
midday, and Ratan would quickly light the fire and cook some chapati:
they made their supper out of that.
Occasionally, sitting on a low wooden office-stool in a corner of his
large hut, the postmaster would speak of his family – his younger
brother, mother and elder sister – all those for whom his heart ached,
alone and exiled as he was. He told this illiterate young girl things which
were often in his mind but which he would never have dreamt of
divulging to the indigo employees – and it seemed quite natural to do so.
Eventually Ratan referred to the postmaster’s family – his mother, sister
and brother – as if they were her own. She even formed affectionate
imaginary pictures of them in her mind.
It was a fine afternoon in the rainy season. The breeze was softly warm;
there was a smell of sunshine on wet grass and leaves. Earth’s breath –
hot with fatigue – seemed to brush against the skin. A persistent bird
cried out monotonously somewhere, making repeated and pathetic
appeals at Nature’s midday durbar. The postmaster had hardly any work:
truly the only things to look at were the smooth, shiny, rain-washed
leaves quivering, the layers of sun-whitened, broken-up clouds left over
from the rain. He watched, and felt how it would be to have a close

companion here, a human object for the heart’s most intimate affections.
Gradually it seemed that the bird was saying precisely this, again and
again; that in the afternoon shade and solitude the same meaning was in
the rustle of the leaves. Few would believe or imagine that a poorly paid
sub-postmaster in a small village could have such feelings in the deep,
idle stillness of the afternoon.
Sighing heavily, the postmaster called for Ratan. Ratan was at that
moment stretched out under a guava tree, eating unripe guavas. At the
sound of her master’s call she got up at once and ran to him.
‘Yes, Dadababu, you called?’ she said, breathlessly.
‘I’m going to teach you to read, a little bit each day,’ said the
postmaster. He taught her daily at midday from then on, starting with
the vowels but quickly progressing to the consonants and conjuncts.
During the month of Srābaṇ, the rain was continuous. Ditches, pits
and channels filled to overflowing with water. The croaking of frogs and
the patter of rain went on day and night. It was virtually impossible to
get about on foot – one had to go to market by boat. One day it rained
torrentially from dawn. The postmaster’s pupil waited for a long time at
the door, but when the usual call failed to come, she quietly entered the
room, with her bundle of books. She saw the postmaster lying on his
bed: thinking that he was resting, she began to tip-toe out again.
Suddenly she heard him call her. She turned round and quickly went up
to him saying, ‘Weren’t you asleep, Dadababu?’
‘I don’t feel well,’ said the postmaster painfully. ‘Have a look – feel my
forehead.’
He felt in need of comfort, ill and miserable as he was, in this isolated
place, the rain pouring down. He remembered the touch on his forehead
of soft hands, conch-shell bangles. He wished his mother or sister were
sitting here next to him, soothing his illness and loneliness with feminine
tenderness. And his longings did not stay unfulfilled. The young girl
Ratan was a young girl no longer. From that moment on she took on the
role of a mother, calling the doctor, giving him pills at the right time,
staying awake at his bedside all night long, cooking him convalescent
meals, and saying a hundred times, ‘Are you feeling a bit better,
Dadababu?’

Many days later, the postmaster got up from his bed, thin and weak.
He had decided that enough was enough: somehow he would have to
leave. He wrote at once to his head office in Calcutta, applying for a
transfer because of the unhealthiness of the place.
Released from nursing the postmaster, Ratan once again took up her
normal place outside his door. But his call did not come for her as
before. Sometimes she would peep in and see the postmaster sitting
distractedly on his stool or lying on his bed. While she sat expecting his
summons, he was anxiously awaiting a reply to his application. She sat
outside the door going over her old lessons numerous times. She was
terrified that if he suddenly summoned her again one day, the conjunct
consonants would all be muddled up in her mind. Eventually, after
several weeks, his call came again one evening. With eager heart, Ratan
rushed into the room. ‘Did you call, Dadababu?’ she asked.
‘I’m leaving tomorrow, Ratan,’ said the postmaster.
‘Where are you going, Dadababu?’
‘I’m going home.’
‘When are you coming back?’
‘I shan’t come back again.’
Ratan did not question him further. The postmaster himself told her
that he had applied for a transfer, but his application had been rejected;
so he was resigning from his post and returning home. For several
minutes, neither of them spoke. The lamp flickered weakly; through a
hole in the crumbling thatched roof, rain-water steadily dripped on to an
earthenware dish. Ratan then went slowly out to the kitchen to make
some chapati. She made them with none of her usual energy. No doubt
her thoughts distracted her. When the postmaster had had his meal, she
suddenly asked, ‘Dadababu, will you take me home with you?’
‘How could I do that!’ said the postmaster, laughing. He saw no need
to explain to the girl why the idea was impossible.
All night long, whether dreaming or awake, Ratan felt the
postmaster’s laugh ringing in her ears. ‘How could I do that!’
When he rose at dawn, the postmaster saw that his bath-water had
been put out ready for him (he bathed according to his Calcutta habit, in
water brought in a bucket). Ratan had not been able to bring herself to

ask him what time he would be leaving; she had carried the bath-water
up from the river late at night, in case he needed it early in the morning.
As soon as he finished his bath, the postmaster called her. She entered
the room softly and looked at him once without speaking, ready for her
orders. ‘Ratan,’ he said, ‘I’ll tell the man who replaces me that he should
look after you as I have; you mustn’t worry just because I’m going.’
No doubt this remark was inspired by kind and generous feelings, but
who can fathom the feelings of a woman? Ratan had meekly suffered
many scoldings from her master, but these kindly words were more than
she could bear. The passion in her heart exploded, and she cried, ‘No,
no, you mustn’t say anything to anyone – I don’t want to stay here.’ The
postmaster was taken aback: he had never seen Ratan behave like that
before.
A new postmaster came. After handing over his charge to him, the
resigning postmaster got ready to leave. Before going, he called Ratan
and said, ‘Ratan, I’ve never been able to pay you anything. Today before
I go I want to give you something, to last you for a few days.’ Except for
the little that he needed for the journey, he took out all the salary that
was in his pocket. But Ratan sank to the ground and clung to his feet,
saying, ‘I beg you, Dadababu, I beg you – don’t give me any money.
Please, no one need bother about me.’ Then she fled, running.
The departing postmaster sighed, picked up his carpet-bag, put his
umbrella over his shoulder, and, with a coolie carrying his blue-andwhite-striped tin trunk on his head, slowly made his way towards the
boat.
When he was on the boat and it had set sail, when the swollen floodwaters of the river started to heave like the Earth’s brimming tears, the
postmaster felt a huge anguish: the image of a simple young village-girl’s
grief-stricken face seemed to speak a great inarticulate universal sorrow.
He felt a sharp desire to go back: should he not fetch that orphaned girl,
whom the world had abandoned? But the wind was filling the sails by
then, the swollen river was flowing fiercely, the village had been left
behind, the riverside burning-ground was in view. Detached by the
current of the river, he reflected philosophically that in life there are
many separations, many deaths. What point was there in going back?
Who belonged to whom in this world?

But Ratan had no such philosophy to console her. All she could do
was wander near the post office, weeping copiously. Maybe a faint hope
lingered in her mind that Dadababu might return; and this was enough
to tie her to the spot, prevent her from going far. O poor, unthinking
human heart! Error will not go away, logic and reason are slow to
penetrate. We cling with both arms to false hope, refusing to believe the
weightiest proofs against it, embracing it with all our strength. In the
end it escapes, ripping our veins and draining our heart’s blood; until,
regaining consciousness, we rush to fall into snares of delusion all over
again.

Profit and Loss1
When a daughter was born, after five sons, her parents dotingly named
her Nirupama. 2 Such a high-flown name had never been heard in the
family before. Usually names of gods and goddesses were used – Ganesh,
Kartik, Parvati and so on.
The question of Nirupama’s marriage now arose. Her father
Ramsundar Mitra searched and searched without finding a groom he
really liked; but in the end he procured the only son of a grand
Raybahadur. The ancestral wealth of this Raybahadur had diminished
considerably, but the family was certainly noble. They asked for a dowry
of 10,000 rupees, and many additional gifts. Ramsundar agreed without
a thought – such a groom should not be allowed to slip through one’s
fingers. But no way could he raise all the money. Even after pawning,
selling, and using every method he could, he still owed 6,000 or 7,000
rupees; and the day of the wedding was drawing near.
The wedding-day came. Someone had agreed to lend the rest of the
money at an extortionate rate of interest, but he failed to turn up on the
day. A furious scene broke out in the marriage-room. Ramsundar fell on
his knees before the Raybahadur, implored him not to bring bad luck by
breaking off the ceremony, insisted he would pay him in full. ‘If you
can’t hand the money to me, now,’ replied the Raybahadur, ‘the
bridegroom will not be brought here.’
The women of the house wept and wailed at this disastrous upset. The
root cause of it sat mutely in her silk wedding-dress and ornaments, her
forehead decorated with sandal-paste. It cannot be said that she felt
much love or respect for her prospective husband’s family.
Suddenly the impasse was resolved. The groom rebelled against his
father, saying firmly, ‘This haggling and bartering means nothing to me.
I came here to marry, and marry I shall.’
‘You see, sir, how young men behave these days,’ said his father to
everyone he turned to.
‘It’s because they have no training in morality or the Shastras,’ said

some of the oldest there. The Raybahadur sat despondent at seeing the
poisonous fruits of modern education in his own son. The marriage was
completed in a gloomy, joyless sort of way.
As Nirupama left for her in-laws’ house her father clasped her to his
breast and could not hold back his tears. ‘Won’t they let me come and
visit you, father?’ she asked. ‘Why shouldn’t they, my love?’ said
Ramsundar. ‘I’ll come and fetch you.’
Ramsundar often went to see his daughter, but he had no honour in
his son-in-law’s house. Even the servants looked down on him.
Sometimes he saw his daughter for five minutes in a separate outer room
of the house; sometimes he was not allowed to see her at all. To be
disgraced so in a kinsman’s house was unbearable. He decided that
somehow or other the money would have to be paid, but the burden of
debt on his shoulders was already hard to control. Expenses dragged at
him terribly; he had to resort to all sorts of petty subterfuges to avoid
running into his creditors.
Meanwhile his daughter was treated spitefully at every turn. She shut
herself into her room and wept – a daily penance for the insults heaped
on her family. Her mother-in-law’s assaults were especially vicious. If
anyone said, ‘How pretty the girl is – it’s a pleasure to look at her,’ she
would burst out, ‘Pretty indeed! Pretty as the family she came from!’
Even her food and clothing were neglected. If a kind neighbour
expressed concern, her mother-in-law would say, ‘She has more than
enough,’ – implying that if the girl’s father had paid full price she would
have received full care. Everyone treated her as if she had no rights in
the household, and had entered it by deceit.
Naturally news of the contempt and shame his daughter was suffering
reached Ramsundar. He decided to sell his house. He did not, however,
tell his sons that he was making them houseless: he intended to rent the
house back after selling it. By this ploy, his sons would not know the
true situation till after his death. But his sons found out. They came and
protested vigorously. The three elder boys, particularly, were married
and probably had children: their objections were so forceful that the sale
was stopped. Ramsundar then started to raise money by taking out small
loans from various quarters at high interest – so much so, that he could
no longer meet household expenses.

Nirupama understood everything from her father’s expression. The old
man’s grey hair, pallid face and permanently cowering manner all
indicated poverty and worry. When a father lets down his own daughter,
he cannot disguise the guilt he feels. Whenever Ramsundar managed to
get permission to speak to his daughter for a few moments, it was clear
at once even from his smile how heart-broken he was.
She longed to return to her father’s house for a few days to console
him. To see his sad face made it awful to be away. One day she said to
Ramsundar, ‘Father, take me home for a while.’
‘Very well,’ he replied – but he had no power to do so, the natural
claims that a father has to his daughter had been pawned in place of a
dowry. Even a glimpse of his daughter had to be begged for meekly, and
if on any occasion it was not granted he was not in a position to ask a
second time. But if his daughter herself wished to come home, how
could he not bring her?
It is better not to tell the story of the indignity, shame and hurt that
Ramsundar had to endure in order to raise the 3,000 rupees that he
needed for an approach to his daughter’s father-in-law. Wrapping the
banknotes in a handkerchief tied into a corner of his chadar, he went to
see him. He began breezily with local news, describing at length a daring
theft in Harekrishna’s house. Comparing the abilities and characters of
Nabinmadhab and Radhamadhab, he praised Radhamadhab and
criticized Nabinmadhab. He gave a hair-raising account of a new illness
in town. Finally, putting down the hookah, he said as if in passing, ‘Yes,
yes, brother, there’s still some money owing, I know. Every day I
remember, and mean to come along with some of it, but then it slips my
mind. I’m getting old, my friend.’ At the end of this long preamble, he
casually produced the three notes, which were really like three of his
ribs. The Raybahadur burst into coarse laughter at the sight of them.
‘Those are no use to me,’ he said, making it plain by using a current
proverb that he did not want to make his hands stink for no reason.
After that, to ask to bring Nirupama home seemed out of the question,
though Ramsundar wondered what good he was doing to himself by
observing polite forms. After sitting in heart-stricken silence for a long
time, he did at last softly raise the matter. ‘Not now,’ said the
Raybahadur, giving no reason; then he left, to go about his work.

Unable to face his daughter, hands trembling, Ramsundar tied the
three banknotes back into the end of his chadar and set off home. He
resolved never to return to the Raybahadur’s house until he had paid the
money in full; only then could he lay claim to Nirupama confidently.
Many months passed. Nirupama sent messenger after messenger, but
her father never appeared. In the end she took offence, and stopped
sending. This grieved Ramsundar sorely, but he still would not go to her.
The month of Āśvin came. ‘This year I shall bring Nirupama home for
the pūjā or else!’ he said to himself, making a fierce vow.
On the fifth or sixth day of the pūjā-fortnight, Ramsundar once again
tied a few notes into the end of his chadar and got ready to go out. A
five-year-old grandson came and said, ‘Grandpa, are you going to buy a
cart for me?’ For weeks he had set his heart on a push-cart to ride in, but
there had been no way of meeting his wish. Then a six-year-old
granddaughter came and said tearfully that she had no nice dress to
wear for the pūjā. Ramsundar knew that well, and had brooded over it
for a long time as he smoked. He had sighed to think of the women of
his household attending the pūjā celebrations at the Raybahadur’s house
like paupers receiving charity, wearing whatever miserable ornaments
they had; but his thoughts had no result other than making the old man’s
lines on his forehead even deeper.
With the cries of his poverty-stricken household ringing in his ears,
Ramsundar arrived at the Raybahadur’s house. Today there was no
hesitation in his manner, no trace of the nervous glances with which he
had formerly approached the gatekeeper and servants: it was as if he
was entering his own house. He was told that the Raybahadur was out –
he would have to wait a while. But he could not hold back his longing to
meet his daughter. Tears of joy rolled down his cheeks when he saw her.
Father and daughter wept together; neither of them could speak for
some moments. Then Ramsundar said, ‘This time I shall take you, my
dear. Nothing can stop me now.’
Suddenly Ramsundar’s eldest son Haramohan burst into the room with
his two small sons. ‘Father,’ he cried, ‘have you really decided to turn us
out on the streets?’
Ramsundar flared up. ‘Should I condemn myself to hell for your
sakes? Won’t you let me do what is right?’ He had sold his house: he had

gone to great lengths to conceal the sale from his sons, but to his anger
and dismay it appeared that they had found out all the same. His
grandson clasped him round his knees and looked up, saying, ‘Grandpa,
haven’t you bought me that cart?’ When he got no answer from the now
crestfallen Ramsundar, the little boy went up to Nirupama and said,
‘Auntie, will you buy me a cart?’
Nirupama had no difficulty in understanding the whole situation.
‘Father,’ she said, ‘if you give a single paisa more to my father-in-law, I
swear solemnly you will never see me again.’
‘What are you saying, child?’ said Ramsundar. ‘If I don’t pay the
money, the shame will be forever on my head – and it will be your
shame too.’
‘The shame will be greater if you pay the money,’ said Nirupama. ‘Do
you think I have no honour? Do you think I am just a money-bag, the
more money in it the higher my value? No, Father, don’t shame me by
paying this money. My husband doesn’t want it anyway.’
‘But then they won’t let you come and see me,’ said Ramsundar.
‘That can’t be helped,’ said Nirupama. ‘Please don’t try to fetch me
any more.’
Ramsundar tremblingly pulled his chadar – with the money tied into
it – back round his shoulders, and left the house like a thief again,
avoiding everyone’s stare.
It did not, however, remain a secret that Ramsundar had come with
the money and that his daughter had forbidden him to hand it over. An
inquisitive servant, a listener at keyholes, passed the information on to
Nirupama’s mother-in-law, whose malice towards her daughter-in-law
now went beyond all limits. The household became a bed of nails for
her. Her husband had gone off a few days after their wedding to be
Deputy Magistrate in another part of the country. Claiming that
Nirupama would be corrupted by contact with her relatives, her in-laws
now completely forbade her from seeing them.
She now fell seriously ill. But this was not wholly her mother-in-law’s
fault. She herself had neglected her health dreadfully. On chilly autumn
nights she lay with her head near the open door, and she wore no extra
clothes during the winter. She ate irregularly. The servants would

sometimes forget to bring her any food: she would not then say anything
to remind them. She was forming a fixed belief that she was herself a
servant in the household, dependent on the favours of her master and
mistress. But her mother-in-law could not stand even this attitude. If
Nirupama showed lack of interest in food, she would say, ‘What a
princess she is! A poor household’s fare is not to her liking!’ Or else she
would say, ‘Look at her. What a beauty! She’s more and more like a
piece of burnt wood.’
When her illness got worse, her mother-in-law said, ‘It’s all put on.’
Finally one day Nirupama said humbly, ‘Let me see my father and
brothers just once, Mother.’
‘Nothing but a trick to get to her father’s house,’ said her mother-inlaw.
It may seem unbelievable, but the evening when Nirupama’s breath
began to fail was when the doctor was first called, and it was the last
visit that he made too.
The eldest daughter-in-law in the household had died, and the funeral
rites were performed with appropriate pomp. The Raychaudhuris were
renowned in the district for the lavishness with which they performed
the immersion of the deity at the end of Durgā-pūjā, but the
Raybahadur’s family became famous for the way Nirupama was
cremated: such a huge sandalwood pyre had never been seen. Only they
could have managed such elaborate rites, and it was rumoured that they
got rather into debt as a result.
Everyone gave Ramsundar long descriptions of the magnificence of his
daughter’s death, when they came to condole with him. Meanwhile a
letter from the Deputy Magistrate arrived: ‘I have made all necessary
arrangements here, so please send my wife to me quickly.’ The
Raybahadur’s wife replied, ‘Dear son, we have secured another girl for
you, so please take leave soon and come home.’
This time the dowry was 20,000 rupees, cash down.

Housewife
When we were two years or so below the scholarship class, our teacher
was Shibanath. He was clean-shaven, with closely cropped hair except
for a short pigtail. The very sight of him scared boys out of their wits. In
the animal world, creatures that sting do not bite. Our teacher did both.
His blows and slaps were like hailstones pounding saplings, and his
sarcasm, too, burnt us to the core.
He complained that the relationship between pupils and teacher was
not what it was in times past; that pupils no longer revered their teacher
like a god. Then he would hurl his power down on to our heads, like a
slighted god, roaring thunderously; but his roaring was mixed with so
many coarse words that no one could have taken it for a thunderbolt.
His ordinary Bengali appearance, too, belied the noise he made, so no
one confused this god of the second stream of the third year with Indra,
Chandra, Varuna or Kartik. There was only one god like him: Yama, god
of death; and after all these years there is no harm in admitting that we
often wished he would go, there and then, to Yama’s home. But clearly
no god can be more malevolent than a man-god. The immortal gods
cause nowhere near so much trouble. If we pick a flower and offer it to
them, they are pleased; but they do not harass us if we don’t offer it.
Human gods demand far more; if we fall the slightest bit short, they
swoop, red-eyed with fury, not at all godlike to look at.
Our teacher had a weapon for torturing boys that sounds trivial but
which was actually terribly cruel. He would give us new names.
Although a name is nothing but a word, people generally love their
names more than their own selves; they will go to tremendous lengths to
further their names; they are willing to die for them. If you distort a
man’s name, you strike at something more precious than life itself. Even
if you change someone’s ugly name to a pretty one – ‘Lord of ghosts’,
say, to ‘Lotus-lover’ – it’s unbearable. From this we derive a principle:
that the abstract is worth more to us than the material, fees to the
goldsmith seem dearer than gold, honour means more than life, one’s
name more than one’s self.

Because of this deep law of human nature, Shashishekhar (‘Mooncrown’) was intensely distressed when Shibanath gave him the name
‘Bhetaki’ (‘Flat-fish’). His misery was doubled by the knowledge that the
name was precisely pointed at his looks; yet all he could do was sit
quietly and suffer silently.
Ashu was given the name ‘Ginni’ (‘Housewife’), but there was a story
behind this.
Ashu was the goody-goody of the class. He never complained to
anyone: he was very shy – maybe he was younger than the others. He
smiled gently at anything that was said to him; he studied hard; many
were keen to make friends with him, but he never played with any other
boy, and as soon as we were released from class he would go straight
home. At one o’clock every day a servant-girl would bring him a few
sweets wrapped up in a leaf, and a little bell-metal pot of water. Ashu
was very embarrassed by this; he could not wait for her to go home
again. He did not want his classmates to think of him as anything more
than a schoolboy. The people at home – his parents, brothers and sisters
– everything about them was very much a private matter, which he did
his utmost to conceal from the boys at school.
So far as his studies were concerned he could not be faulted in any
way, but every now and then he was late to school and could give no
good answer when Shibanath questioned him. His disgrace on these
occasions was appalling: the teacher made him stand by the steps to the
building, bent double with his hands on his knees. His misery and shame
were thus displayed to four whole classes of boys.
A day’s holiday came (to mark an eclipse). The next day Shibanath
took his place on his stool as usual and, looking towards the door, saw
Ashu entering the class with his slate and school-books wrapped in an
ink-stained cloth. He was even more hesitant than usual.
‘Here comes the Housewife!’ said Shibanath, laughing drily. Later,
when the class was over, just before he dismissed the boys, he called out,
‘Listen to this, everyone.’
It was as if the whole of Earth’s gravity were dragging young Ashu
down, but all he could do was sit with his legs and the end of his dhoti
dangling down from the bench, while all the boys stared at him. There
were many years to come in Ashu’s life, many days of joy, sorrow and

shame more significant than this – but none could compare with what
his young heart suffered on this occasion. Yet the background to it was
very ordinary, and can be explained in a very few words.
Ashu had a little sister. She had no friend or cousin of her own age, so
Ashu was her only playmate. Ashu’s home had a covered porch, with a
gate and railings in front. The holiday had been cloudy and very wet.
The few people who continued to pass by, shoes in their hands,
umbrellas over their heads, were in too much of a hurry to look round.
Ashu played all day with his sister, seated on the steps of the porch,
while clouds darkened the sky and the rain pattered.
It was the wedding-day of his sister’s doll. Ashu was giving solemn
and scrupulous instructions to his sister about the preparations for the
wedding. A problem then arose about who would be the priest. The little
girl suddenly jumped up, and Ashu heard her ask someone, ‘Please, will
you be the priest at my doll’s wedding?’ Turning round, he saw a
bedraggled Shibanath standing under the porch, folding his wet
umbrella. He had been walking along the road, and had taken shelter
from the rain there. It was Shibanath whom the little girl had asked to
be priest at her doll’s wedding.
Ashu dashed straight into the house when he saw him, abandoning
the game and his sister. His holiday had been utterly ruined.
This was what Shibanath described with withering amusement the
following day, to account for his calling Ashu ‘Housewife’ in front of
everyone. At first the boy smiled gently, as he did to everything he
heard, and tried to join in a little with the merriment all around him.
But then one o’clock struck, the classes were dismissed, the servant-girl
from home was standing at the gate with two sweets in a śāl-leaf and
some water in a shining bell-metal pot, and Ashu’s smile gave way to a
deep red blush around his face and ears. The veins in his aching
forehead began to throb; he could no longer hold back the flood of tears
in his eyes.
Shibanath took a light meal in his rest-room, and settled down for a
smoke. The boys danced round Ashu, boisterously chanting, ‘Housewife,
housewife!’ He realized that to play with your little sister on a school
holiday was the most shameful thing in the world, and he could not
believe that people would ever forget what he had done.

Little Master’s Return
I
Raicharan was twelve when he first came to work in the house. He was
from Jessore district and had long hair and large eyes; a slender boy
with gleaming dark skin. His employers, like him, were Kaisthas. His
main duty was to help with looking after their one-year-old son – who in
time progressed from Raicharan’s arms to school, from school to college,
and from college to being munsiff in the local court. Raicharan had
remained his servant. But now there was a mistress as well as a master
in the household, and most of the rights that Raicharan had hitherto had
over Anukul Babu passed to her.
Although his former responsibilities were diminished by her presence,
she largely replaced them with a new one. A son to Anukul was soon
born, and was won over completely by the sheer force of Raicharan’s
devotion. He swung him about with such enthusiasm, tossed him in the
air with such dexterity, cooed and shook his head in his face so
vigorously, chanted so many meaningless random questions for which
there could be no reply, that the very sight of Raicharan sent the little
master into raptures.
When the boy learnt to crawl stealthily over a door-sill, giggling with
merriment if anyone tried to catch him, and speedily making for
somewhere safe to hide, Raicharan was entranced by such uncommon
skill and quickness of decision. He would go to the child’s mother and
say admiringly, ‘Mā, your son will be a judge when he grows up – he’ll
earn a fortune.’ That there were other children in the world who could
at this young age dart over a door-sill was beyond Raicharan’s
imagination; only future judges could perform such feats. His first
faltering steps were amazing too, and when he began to call his mother
‘Ma’, his pisimā ‘Pishi’, and Raicharan ‘Channa’, Raicharan proclaimed
these staggering achievements to everyone he met. How astonishing it
was that he should not only call his mother ‘Ma’, his aunt ‘Pishi’, but

also Raicharan ‘Channa’! Really, it was hard to understand where such
intelligence had sprung from. Certainly no adult could ever show such
extraordinary intelligence, and people would be unsure of his fitness to
be a judge even if he could.
Before long, Raicharan had to put a string round his neck and pretend
to be a horse; or he had to be a wrestler and fight with the boy – and if
he failed to let himself be defeated and thrown to the ground, there
would be hell to pay. By now, Anukul had been transferred to a Padma
river district. He had brought a push-chair from Calcutta for his son.
Raicharan would dress him in a satin shirt, gold-embroidered cap,
golden bangles and a pair of anklets, and take the young prince out in
his push-chair twice a day for some air.
The rainy season came. The Padma began to swallow up gardens,
villages and fields in great hungry gulps. Thickets and bushes
disappeared from the sandbanks. The menacing gurgle of water was all
around, and the splashing of crumbling banks; and swirling, rushing
foam showed how fierce the river’s current had become.
One afternoon, when it was cloudy but did not look like rain,
Raicharan’s capricious young master refused to stay at home. He climbed
into his push-chair and Raicharan gingerly pushed it to the river-bank
beyond the paddy-fields. There were no boats on the river, no people
working in the fields: through gaps in the clouds, the sun could be seen
preparing with silent fiery ceremony to set behind the deserted
sandbanks across the river. Suddenly peace was broken by the boy
pointing and calling, ‘Fowers, Channa, fowers!’ A little way off there was
a huge kadamba tree on a wet, muddy stretch of land, with some flowers
on its upper branches: these were what had caught the boy’s attention.
(A few days previously, Raicharan had strung some flowers on to sticks
and made him a ‘kadamba-cart’; he had had such fun pulling it along
with a string that Raicharan did not have to put on reins that day – an
instant promotion from horse to groom.)
‘Channa’ was not very willing to squelch through the mud to pick the
flowers. He quickly pointed in the other direction and said, ‘Look, look
at that bird – flying – now it’s gone. Come, bird, come!’ He pushed the
chair forward fast, burbling on in this way. But it was futile to try to
distract by so simple a device a boy who would one day become a judge

– especially as there was nothing particular to attract his attention
anywhere, and imaginary birds would not work for very long. ‘All right,’
said Raicharan, ‘you sit in the chair and I’ll get you the flowers. Be good
now, don’t go near the water.’ Tucking his dhoti up above his knees, he
headed for the kadamba tree.
But the fact that he had been forbidden to go near the water
immediately attracted the boy’s mind away from the kadamba-flowers
and towards the water. He saw it gurgling and swirling along, as if a
thousand wavelets were naughtily, merrily escaping to a forbidden place
beyond the reach of some mighty Raicharan. The boy was thrilled by
their mischievous example. He gently stepped down from his chair, and
edged his way to the water. Picking a long reed, he leant forward,
pretending the reed was a fishing-rod: the romping gurgling wavelets
seemed to be murmuring an invitation to the boy to come and join their
game.
There was a single plopping sound, but on the bank of the Padma
river in monsoon spate many such sounds can be heard. Raicharan had
filled the fold of his dhoti with kadamba-flowers. Climbing down from
the tree, he made his way back towards the push-chair, smiling – but
then he saw that the child was not there. Looking all around, he saw no
sign of him anywhere. His blood froze: the universe was suddenly unreal
– pale and murky as smoke. A single desperate cry burst from his
breaking heart: ‘Master, little master, my sweet, good little master!’ But
no one called out ‘Channa’ in reply, no childish mischievous laugh came
back. The Padma went on rushing and swirling and gurgling as before,
as if it knew nothing and had no time to attend to the world’s minor
occurrences.
As evening fell the boy’s mother grew anxious and sent people out to
search with lanterns. When they reached the river-bank, they found
Raicharan wandering over the fields like a midnight storm-wind,
sobbing, ‘Master, my little master!’ At last he returned home and threw
himself at his mistress’s feet, crying in reply to all her questions, ‘I don’t
know, Mā, I don’t know.’
Although everyone knew in their hearts that the Padma was the
culprit, suspicion fell on a group of gypsies encamped at the edge of the
village. The mistress of the house even began to suspect that Raicharan

had stolen the boy – so much so that she called him and entreated,
‘Bring back my child! I’ll give you whatever money you want.’ But
Raicharan could only beat his brow, and she ordered him from her sight.
Anukul Babu tried to dispel his wife’s unfounded suspicion: what motive
could Raicharan have had for so vile an act? ‘What do you mean?’ said
his wife. ‘The boy had gold ornaments on him.’

II
Raicharan went back to his home village. His wife had not borne him a
child, and he had long ceased to hope for one. But it so happened that
before the year had ended his ageing wife gave birth to a son – and then
soon afterwards died.
At first Raicharan had nothing but hatred for the newly born child,
who he felt had somehow taken the little master’s place by deceit. It
seemed a deadly sin to delight in his own son after allowing his master’s
only son to be washed away. If his widowed sister had not been there,
the child would not have breathed Earth’s air for long.
Amazing it was, but after a few months the child began to crawl over
the door-sill and show a merry ability to evade all sorts of restrictions.
He chuckled and wailed just as the little master had done. Sometimes
when Raicharan heard him cry his heart missed a beat; it was just as if
the little master were crying somewhere for his lost Raicharan. Phelna –
that was what Raicharan’s sister called the boy – began in due course to
call her ‘Pishi’. When Raicharan heard that familiar name one day, he
suddenly thought, ‘The little master cannot do without my love: he has
been born again in my house.’
There were several convincing proofs in favour of this belief. First,
there was the short interval between the death and the birth. Second, his
wife could not, at so advanced an age, have conceived a son merely
through her own fecundity. Third, the child crawled, toddled and called
his aunt ‘Pishi’ just as the little master had done. There was much to
indicate that he too would grow up to become a judge. Raicharan then
remembered the strong suspicions the mistress of the house had had, and
he realized with astonishment that her maternal instinct had rightly told

her that someone had stolen her son. He now felt deeply ashamed of the
way he had neglected the child: devotion took hold of him again. From
now on he brought him up like a rich man’s son. He bought him satin
shirts and a gold-embroidered cap. His dead wife’s ornaments were
melted down to make bangles and bracelets for him. He forbade him
from playing with the local children; all day long he himself was the
child’s sole playmate. Whenever they got the chance, the local boys
would mock Phelna for being a ‘prince’, and the villagers marvelled at
Raicharan’s odd behaviour.
When Phelna was old enough to go to school, Raicharan sold his land
and took the boy to Calcutta. With great difficulty he found a job, and
sent Phelna to a high-class school. He skimped and scraped to get the
boy good food and clothing and a decent education, saying to himself, ‘If
it was love for me that brought you into my house, dear child, then you
must have nothing but the best.’
Twelve years passed in this way. The boy did well at his studies and
was fine to behold: sturdily built, with a dark, glossy complexion. He
took great trouble over his hair; his tastes were refined and cultured. He
could never think of his father quite as his father, because Raicharan
treated him with a father’s affection but a servant’s devotion. To his
discredit, Phelna never told anyone that Raicharan was his father. The
students in the hostel where Phelna lived were always making fun of the
rustic Raicharan; and it cannot be denied that when his father was not
present Phelna joined in the fun. But everyone was fond of the mild,
doting Raicharan, and Phelna also loved him – but (to repeat) not quite
as his father: affection was mixed with condescension.
Raicharan grew old. His employer was perpetually finding fault with
him. His health was deteriorating, and he could not concentrate on his
work: he was getting forgetful. But no employer who pays full wages
will accept old age as an excuse. Moreover, the cash that Raicharan had
raised by selling off his possessions was nearly at an end. Phelna was
always complaining now that he was short of proper clothes and
luxuries.

III

One day Raicharan suddenly resigned from his job, and giving Phelna
some money said, ‘Something has happened – I need to go back to the
village for a few days.’ He then set off for Barasat, where Anukul Babu
was now munsiff.
Anukul had had no other child. His wife still grieved for her son.
One evening Anukul was resting after returning from the court, while
his wife, at great expense, purchased from a sannyāsī a holy root and a
blessing that would bring her a child. A voice was heard in the yard:
‘Greetings, Mā.’
‘Who’s there?’ said Anukul Babu.
Raicharan appeared. ‘I am Raicharan,’ he said, taking the dust of his
former master’s feet.
Anukul’s heart melted at the sight of the old man. He asked him
numerous questions about his present circumstances, and invited him to
work for him again.
Raicharan smiled weakly and said, ‘Let me pay my respects to
Māthākrun.’
Anukul Babu took him through to the inner rooms of the house. His
wife was not nearly so pleased to see Raicharan, but Raicharan took no
notice of this and said with clasped hands, ‘Master, Mā, it was I who
stole your son. It was not the Padma, it was no one else, it was I,
ungrateful wretch that I am.’
‘What are you saying?’ said Anukul. ‘Where is he?’
‘He lives with me,’ said Raicharan. ‘I’ll bring him the day after
tomorrow.’
That was Sunday, and the courts were closed. Husband and wife
watched the road anxiously from dawn. At ten o’clock, Raicharan
arrived with Phelna.
Anukul’s wife without thought or question drew him on to her lap,
touched him, sniffed him, eyed his face intently, cried and laughed
nervously. Truly, the boy was fine to look at – nothing in his looks or
dress suggested a poor background. There was a very loving, modest,
bashful expression in his face. At the sight of him, Anukul’s heart too
swelled with love. But keeping his composure, he asked, ‘What proof
have you?’

‘How can such an act be proved?’ said Raicharan. ‘Only God knows
that I stole your son; no one else in the world knows.’
Anukul thought the matter over and decided that since his wife had
embraced the boy as her own with such fervour it would not be
appropriate to search for proof now; whatever the truth might be, it was
best to believe. In any case, how could Raicharan have acquired such a
boy? And why should the old servant wish to mislead them now?
Questioning the boy, he learnt that he had lived with Raicharan from an
early age and had called him Father, but that Raicharan had never
behaved towards him like a father – he had been more like a servant.
Driving all doubt from his mind, Anukul said, ‘But, Raicharan, you must
not darken our door again now.’
With clasped hands and quavering voice Raicharan replied, ‘I am old
now, master. Where shall I go?’
‘Let him stay,’ said the mistress of the house. ‘I have forgiven him. Let
our son be blessed.’
‘He cannot be forgiven for what he has done,’ said the righteous
Anukul.
‘I didn’t do it,’ cried Raicharan, embracing his master’s feet. ‘God did
it.’
Even angrier now that Raicharan should lay the blame for his own sin
on to God, Anukul said, ‘One should not place trust in someone who has
betrayed trust so heinously.’
Rising from Anukul’s feet, Raicharan said, ‘It was not I, Master.’
‘Then who was it?’
‘It was my Fate.’
No educated man could be satisfied by such an explanation.
‘I have no one else in the world,’ said Raicharan.
Phelna was certainly rather annoyed that Raicharan had stolen him –
a munsiff’s son – and dishonourably claimed him as his own. But he said
generously to Anukul, ‘Father, please pardon him. If you won’t let him
stay in the house, then give him a monthly allowance.
Raicharan, saying nothing, looked once at his son and made an
obeisance to all; then he went out through the door and disappeared into

the world’s multitude. At the end of the month, when Anukul sent a
small sum to Raicharan at his village address, the money came back. No
one of that name was known there.

The Divide
Genealogical investigation would reveal that Banamali and
Himangshumali were actually distant cousins: the relationship was
complicated, but possible to trace. Their families, however, had been
neighbours for a long time, with only a garden dividing them; so
however remote their blood-relationship, they knew each other very
well.
Banamali was much older than Himangshu. Before Himangshu had
cut his teeth or could talk, Banamali would carry him around in the
garden to enjoy the morning or evening air; he would play with him, dry
his tears, lull him to sleep; indeed he did everything an intelligent
grown-up person is supposed to do to entertain a child – shaking his
head at him, shrieking with dismay, expressing babyish excitement or
fearsome enthusiasm. He had little education: he liked to garden, or be
with his young cousin. He nurtured him like a rare and precious creeper,
which he watered with all his love; and as the creeper grew, pervading
the whole of his inner and outer life, Banamali counted himself blessed.
There may not be many, but there are some people who will easily
sacrifice themselves completely to a small fancy or a little child or an
undeserving friend. Their love may be tiny compared to the vastness of
the world, but it is to them a business in which they happily sink all that
is vital to them. They will then live contentedly on a pittance, or else
one morning sell their remaining property and take to begging in the
streets.
As Himangshu grew, he formed a firm friendship with Banamali,
despite their difference in age and remoteness of blood-relationship. Age
seemed of no consequence. There was a reason for this. Himangshu
learned to read and write, and had by nature a strong desire for
knowledge. He would sit and read any book that came his way: he
would read many worthless books, no doubt, but his mind matured in all
directions as a result of his reading. Banamali listened to him with great
admiration. He took his advice, discussed every problem with him, small

or large, never ignored him on any subject just because he was a child.
Nothing is more cherished in this world than a person whom one has
brought up with utmost love, and whose knowledge, intelligence and
goodness inspire respect.
Himangshu also loved gardening. But there was a difference here
between the two friends. Banamali loved it with his heart; Himangshu
with his intelligence. For Banamali, raising plants was an instinctive
occupation: they were like children to him, only more so, in their
softness and unawareness, in the way they never asked to be cared for
but would grow up like children if given loving care.1 For Himangshu,
plants were a subject of curiosity. The sowing of seeds, the sprouting of
seedlings, the buds, the blooms all aroused his attention. He was full of
advice about planting, grafting, manuring, watering and so on, and
Banamali gladly followed it. Whatever nature or nurture could do, in the
combining or separating of plants, was achieved by the two friends in
that modest patch of garden.
There was a small cement patio just inside the gate to the garden. At
four o’clock Banamali would come there, lightly dressed, with a crimped
chadar round his shoulders, and sit in the shade with his hookah. He was
quite alone, and had no book or newspaper with him. He would sit and
smoke, with a distracted meditative air, glancing with half-closed eyes to
right or to left, letting time float by like coils of smoke from the hookah
as they slowly drifted and broke and disappeared, leaving no trace.
At last Himangshu returned from school, and after a snack and a wash
came into the garden. Banamali immediately dropped the stem of the
hookah and stood up. His eagerness made it perfectly plain whom he
had been patiently waiting for all this time. Then the two of them
strolled in the garden, talking. When it became dark they sat on a bench,
while the southern breeze stirred the leaves in the trees. On some days
there was no wind: the trees would be as still as a picture, and the sky
above would be full of brightly shining stars.
Himangshu talked, and Banamali listened quietly. Even what he did
not understand, he enjoyed. Things that would have irritated him greatly
coming from anyone else were amusing when spoken by Himangshu.
Himangshu’s powers of expression, recollection and imagination gained
from having such an admiring, grown-up listener. He sometimes spoke

of things he had read, sometimes things he had thought, sometimes
whatever came into his head – supplying with his imagination whatever
his knowledge lacked. He said much that was correct and much that was
not correct, but Banamali listened solemnly. Sometimes he put in a word
of his own, but accepted any objections that Himangshu made; and next
day, sitting in the shade again, puffing at his hookah, he would ponder
over what he had heard, marvelling at it.
Meanwhile a dispute had arisen. Between Banamali’s garden and
Himangshu’s house there was a drainage ditch; at a point along this
ditch a lime tree had grown. When the fruits ripened, Banamali’s family
servant tried to pick them, while Himangshu’s family servant stopped
him – and they began to argue so fiercely that if the insults they rained
on each other had been made of something material, the whole ditch
would have been choked with them. From this, a heated quarrel
developed between Banamali’s father Harachandra and Himangshu’s
father Gokulchandra, and they went to court over the ownership of the
ditch. A long verbal war began between champion lawyers and barristers
fighting on one side or the other. The money that was spent on each side
exceeded even the floods that flowed through the ditch during the
month of Bhādra.
In the end Harachandra won; it was proved that the ditch was his and
no one else had a claim to the fruit of the lime tree. There was an
appeal, but the ditch and the lime tree remained with Harachandra.
While the court-case was going on, the friendship between Banamali
and Himangshu was not affected. Indeed, so anxious was Banamali not
to let the dispute cast a shadow over either of them, that he tried to bind
Himangshu ever more closely to him, and Himangshu showed not the
slightest loss of affection either.
On the day that Harachandra won the case, there was great rejoicing
in his house, especially in the women’s quarters; but Banamali lay
sleepless that night. The next afternoon, when he took his place on the
patio in the garden, his face was sad and anxious, as if he alone had
suffered an immense defeat that meant nothing to anyone else.
The time when Himangshu usually came elapsed; at six o’clock there
was still no sign of him. Banamali sighed heavily and gazed at

Himangshu’s house. Through the open window he could see his friend’s
school-clothes hung up on the ālnā; many other familiar signs showed
that Himangshu was at home. Banamali left his hookah and paced up
and down, looking dejectedly towards the window again and again, but
Himangshu did not come into the garden.
When the lamps were lit in the evening, Banamali slowly walked up to
Himangshu’s house. Gokulchandra was cooling himself by an open door.
‘Who is it?’ he said.
Banamali started. He felt like a thief who had been caught. ‘It’s me,
Uncle,’ he said nervously.
‘What do you want?’ he said. ‘There’s no one at home.’
Banamali returned to the garden and sat mutely there. When it was
dark, he watched the window-shutters of Himangshu’s house being
closed for the night one by one. Lamplight inside the house shone
through cracks round the doors; later, most of the lamps were
extinguished. In the darkness of the night, Banamali felt that the doors
of Himangshu’s house were totally closed to him, and all he could do
was remain alone in the darkness outside.
The next day he went again and sat in the garden, hoping that today
Himangshu might come. His friend had come every day for so long that
he never imagined that he might not come again. He never supposed
that the bond between them could be torn; he had taken it so much for
granted, that he had not realized how totally wrapped up in it his life
had become. He had learnt now that the bond had indeed been torn, but
so sudden a disaster was quite impossible to take in.
Every day that week he went on sitting in the garden at his usual
time, in case Himangshu chanced to come. But alas, the meetings that
used to occur by agreement failed to recur by chance. On Sunday he
wondered if Himangshu would come to his house in the morning for
lunch, as he had always done in the past. He did not exactly believe that
he would, but he could not stop hoping. Mid-morning came, but
Himangshu did not. ‘He’ll come after lunch,’ said Banamali to himself –
but he did not come after lunch. So he thought, ‘Today perhaps he is
taking a siesta. He’ll come when he wakes up.’ Whatever time
Himangshu might have woken from his siesta, he did not come.

Evening fell again, then night; Himangshu’s doors closed one by one,
and the lights in his house went out one by one.
When Fate had taken each of the seven days from Monday to Sunday
away from Banamali, leaving no day on which to pin his hopes, he
turned his tearful eyes towards Himangshu’s shuttered house, appealed
to it from the depths of his distress. ‘Dear God,’1 he cried, gathering all
his life’s pain into the words.

Taraprasanna’s Fame1
Like most writers, Taraprasanna was rather shy and retiring in nature.
To go out amongst other people was an ordeal for him. Sitting at home
and writing all the time had weakened his eyesight, bent his back, and
given him little experience of the world. Social pleasantries did not come
easily to him, so he did not feel very safe outside his home. Others
thought him a bit stupid, and they could not be blamed for this. A
distinguished gentleman on first meeting Taraprasanna might say
warmly, ‘I cannot tell you what pleasure it gives me to meet you.’
Taraprasanna would not respond: he would stare, tongue-tied, at his
right palm, as if to imply, ‘It is possible that you are very pleased, but I
wonder how I can be so false as to say that I am pleased.’ Or he might be
invited to someone’s house one afternoon: his wealthy host might – as
dusk fell and food was served – deprecate his own hospitality with such
words as ‘Nothing special – just our ordinary humble fare – a poor man’s
crust – not worthy of you at all, I’m afraid.’ Taraprasanna would say
nothing, as if it were impossible to disagree with what his host was
saying. Sometimes some good-natured person averred that scholarship as
profound as Taraprasanna’s was rare in this age, that Sarasvati had
deserted her lotus-seat to dwell in Taraprasanna’s throat. He made no
objection to this – choked, so it seemed, by Sarasvati’s presence in his
throat. He should have known that those who praise a man to his face,
and disparage themselves, deliberately exaggerate because they expect
to be contradicted. If the person they are speaking to takes in everything
without blenching, they feel let down. They are pleased to be told that
their statements are false.
Taraprasanna behaved quite differently with the people in his own
home – so much so that even his wife Dakshayani could not beat him in
an argument. She was forced to say, ‘All right, all right, I give in. I’ve got
things to do now.’ Very few husbands have the skill or luck ever to get
their wives to admit defeat in a verbal battle!
Taraprasanna lived contentedly. Dakshayani firmly believed that no
one equalled her husband in learning or intellect, and she did not

hesitate to say so. He would reply, ‘You don’t have any other husband to
compare me with’ – which made her very cross. Her only complaint was
that her husband had never displayed his extraordinary talents to the
outside world – had never made any effort to do so. Nothing that he had
written had been published.
Sometimes she asked to hear her husband’s writing, and the less she
understood it the more it astonished her. She had read Krittibas’s
Ramayana, Kashidas’s Mahabharata and Kabikankan’s Chandimangal, and
had heard them being recited. They were all as clear as water – even
illiterate people could easily understand them; but she had never
encountered writing like her husband’s, so brilliant that it was
unintelligible. She thought to herself, ‘When these books are printed and
no one understands a word, how amazed everyone will be!’ Again and
again she told her husband, ‘You should get your writings printed.’
‘With regard to the printing of books,’ he replied, ‘the great Manu has
said: “It is a natural activity for created beings, but abstention brings
great rewards.” ’1
Taraprasanna had four children – all daughters. Dakshayani regarded
this as a failing in herself, and therefore felt unworthy of so talented a
husband. To be married to a man who produced, at the drop of a hat,
such formidable tomes, and yet to have nothing but female offspring,
was shameful incompetence on her part.
When Taraprasanna’s eldest daughter reached his chest in height, his
carefree contentment ended. He now remembered that one by one his
four daughters would have to be married, and this would cost an
enormous amount of money. His wife said confidently, ‘Just apply your
mind a bit, and I’m sure we won’t need to worry.’
‘You really think so?’ said Taraprasanna rather anxiously. ‘All right,
what do you suggest?’
‘Go to Calcutta,’ said Dakshayani, without hesitation or doubt. ‘Have
your books printed, get yourself known to everyone. The money will
soon roll in.’
Taraprasanna was gradually encouraged by his wife, and decided that
what he had written to date was enough to pay for the wedding of every
girl in the village. But now a big dilemma arose about his visit to

Calcutta. Dakshayani could not bear to let her innocent, helpless,
pampered husband go away on his own. Who would feed him, dress
him, remind him of his daily chores, protect him from the various
hazards of the world? Her inexperienced husband, however, was equally
unhappy about taking his wife to a strange place. In the end Dakshayani
engaged a worldly-wise man from the village to go in her stead, giving
him countless instructions about her husband’s daily needs. She
extracted numerous vows from him as she saw him off, and loaded him
with charms and amulets; and she threw herself to the ground weeping
when he had gone.
In Calcutta Taraprasanna, with the help of his astute minder,
published his book The Radiance of Vedanta. Most of the money he had
raised by pawning his wife’s jewellery was spent on this.
He sent The Radiance of Vedanta to bookshops; and to every editor,
however important or unimportant, he sent copies for review. He also
sent one to his wife, by registered mail. He was afraid that otherwise it
would be stolen by the postman.
On the day that Dakshayani first saw the book, with her husband’s
name printed on the title page, she invited all the women she knew in
the village round for a meal. She left the book open near to where she
asked them to sit, and when everyone was seated she said, ‘Oh dear,
who’s dropped that book over there? Annada, dear, could you pick it up?
I’ll put it away.’ Annada was the only one who could read. The book was
put back on the shelf. For a few minutes Dakshayani busied herself with
something else; then she said to her eldest daughter, ‘Do you want to
read your father’s book, Shashi? Go ahead, child, read it. Don’t be shy.’
But Shashi showed no interest in it, so a little later her mother said
crossly, ‘Don’t spoil your father’s book! Give it to Kamaladidi to put back
on top of that cupboard.’ If the book had been conscious of anything, it
would have felt like the death of Vedanta after such a day of torment.
One by one reviews appeared in the papers. What Dakshayani had
anticipated turned out to be largely correct: reviewers throughout the
land, unable to understand a single word of the book, were mightily
impressed by it. With one voice they said: ‘No book of such substance
has been published before.’ Critics who never touched a book beyond
Bengali translations of Reynolds’ London Mystery1 wrote with great

enthusiasm: ‘If instead of sackfuls of plays and novels more books like
this could come out, Bengali literature would really attract readers.’ Men
who for generations had never heard of Vedanta wrote: ‘We do not
concur with Taraprasanna Babu on every point – lack of space prevents
us from saying where. On the whole, however, our views are in
agreement with the author’s.’ On the basis of that statement, if true, the
book ‘on the whole’ should have been thrown to the flames.
From wherever there were libraries or no libraries, librarians wrote to
Taraprasanna asking for the book, buying it with their official letterheads rather than with money. Many wrote, ‘Your thoughtful book has
met a great need in our country.’ Taraprasanna was not quite sure what
they meant by ‘thoughtful’, but he proudly posted The Radiance of
Vedanta to every library at his own expense.
Just when his pleasure at all these words of praise had reached its
height, a letter came from Dakshayani: she was expecting a fifth child
very soon. He and his custodian now went round to the shops to collect
the money the book had earned – but the shopkeepers all said the same:
not a single copy had been sold. Only in one place did he hear that
someone had written from the country asking for the book: it was sent
cash-on-delivery and returned – no one had taken it. The bookseller had
to pay for the postage, so he angrily insisted on returning all the copies
to the author there and then.
Taraprasanna went back to his lodgings, thinking and thinking but
finding it impossible to comprehend what had happened. The more he
thought about his ‘thoughtful’ book the more worried he became. At last
he set off home, making do with the tiny amount of money he had left.
He greeted his wife with an elaborate show of cheerfulness. She was
smiling in anticipation of good news. He threw a copy of The Bengal
Messenger on to her lap. As she read it, she bestowed inexhaustible
blessings on the editor, made mental pūjā-offerings to his pen. Then she
turned to her husband again: he took out a copy of New Dawn.
Dakshayani read this too with immense delight, and again turned her
tender, expectant gaze on her husband. He now took out The New Age;
then India’s Fortune; then The Happy Awakening; then The Sun’s Light and
The Wave of News; then Hope, The Dawn, Uplift, Blossom, The Companion,
The Sita Gazette, The Ahalya Library Journal, Pleasant News, The Guardian,

World Judge, Jasmine-creeper. The smiling Dakshayani wept tears of joy.
Then, drying her eyes, she looked at her husband once more – at the
light of fame in his beaming face.
‘There are lots more journals,’ he said.
‘I’ll look at them this afternoon,’ said Dakshayani. ‘Now give me the
other news.’
‘Just as I was leaving Calcutta,’ said Taraprasanna, ‘I heard that the
Governor-General’s wife had brought out a book – but she didn’t
mention The Radiance of Vedanta in it.’
‘I don’t want to hear about that,’ said Dakshayani. ‘Tell me what else
you have brought.’
‘I have a few letters,’ said Taraprasanna.
Then Dakshayani said straight out, ‘How much money have you
brought?’
‘Five rupees borrowed from Bidhubhushan,’ said Taraprasanna.
When at last Dakshayani had heard the whole story, all her trust in
the honesty of the world was completely destroyed. The booksellers had
clearly cheated her husband, and all the book-buyers of Bengal had
conspired to cheat the booksellers. Finally she concluded that
Bidhubhushan, the man she had sent with her husband to deputize for
her, had secretly been in league with the booksellers; and come to think
of it, Bishvambhar Chatterjee from across the village – her husband’s
chief enemy – had surely had a part in the plot. Yes, two days after her
husband had left for Calcutta, she had seen Bishvambhar talking to
Kanai Pal under the banyan tree: it did not occur to her that
Bishvambhar quite often chatted to Kanai Pal, for the conspiracy was
now as clear as daylight to her.
Dakshayani’s domestic worries continued to grow. The failure of this
one simple way of earning money redoubled her shame that she had so
sinfully borne only daughters. Neither Bishvambhar, Bidhubhushan, nor
all the inhabitants of Bengal could be held responsible for this: the
shame rested on her alone, though she also blamed her daughters
themselves – those that she had and those that she might yet have. She
had not a moment’s peace of mind, day or night.
Her state of health, as her confinement approached, became so bad

that everyone was very alarmed. The helpless, distraught Taraprasanna
went to Bishvambhar and said, ‘Dādā, if you could take fifty or so of my
books as a pledge for a loan, I could send for a good midwife from town.’
‘Don’t worry, my friend,’ said Bishvambhar, ‘I’ll give you the money
you need – you keep the books.’ He then persuaded Kanai Pal to lend
him some money, and Bidhubhushan went to Calcutta at his own
expense to fetch the midwife.
Impelled by something, Dakshayani called her husband into her room
and said, making him vow to her, ‘Whenever that pain of yours gets bad,
don’t forget to take your Dream Medicine – and never take off the
amulet the sannyāsī gave you.’ Taking her husband’s hands, she secured
his promise on countless other minor matters. She also told him not to
put any trust in Bidhubhushan, who had ruined him, so that now there
was no question of putting her husband – medicine, amulet, blessings
and all – into his hands. She repeatedly warned her husband – her
trusting, forgetful, Shiva-like husband – about the heartless and crooked
conspirators of this world. Finally, in a whisper, she said, ‘When my
baby daughter is born, if she lives, see that she is called Vedantaprabha,
“The Radiance of Vedanta”. Later you can call her simply “Prabha”.’ She
took the dust of her husband’s feet. In her mind was the thought, ‘I came
into his house to give him nothing but daughters. Perhaps his
misfortunes will end now.’
When the midwife cried out, ‘Mā, look here, what a beautiful little girl
you have,’ Dakshayani took one look and then closed her eyes, saying
faintly, ‘Vedantaprabha’. She had no time to say any more in this world.

Wealth Surrendered
I
Brindaban Kunda was furious. He announced to his father, ‘I’m leaving –
right now.’
‘You ungrateful scoundrel,’ said Yajnanath Kunda. ‘All I’ve spent
feeding and clothing you over the years, with not a paisa back – and
now see how you turn on me.’
In fact, the amount spent on food and clothing in Yajnanath’s house
had never been great. The sages of old survived on impossibly little;
Yajnanath presented an equally noble example. He could not go quite as
far as he liked, partly because of the demands of modern life, partly
because of the unreasonable rules for keeping body and soul together
which Nature imposes. His son had put up with this while he was
unmarried; but after marrying, his standards of food and dress began to
clash with his father’s extreme austerity. Brindaban’s standards were
material rather than spiritual. His requirements were in line with
society’s changing response to cold, heat, hunger and thirst. There were
frequent rows between father and son, and matters came to a head when
Brindaban’s wife fell seriously ill. The kabirāj wanted to prescribe an
expensive medicine for her, but Yajnanath questioned his competence
and dismissed him. Brindaban pleaded with his father at first, then grew
angry, but to no avail. When his wife died, he accused his father of
murdering her. ‘What do you mean?’ said Yajnanath. ‘Do you suppose
that no one who takes medicine dies? If expensive medicine were the
answer, kings and emperors would be immortal. Why should your wife
die with any more pomp than your mother or grandmother?’
Truly if Brindaban had not been blinded with grief and seen things
objectively, he would have found much consolation in this thought.
Neither his mother nor grandmother had taken medicine when they
were dying. It was an ancient custom in the household not to do so. But
modern people do not want to die according to ancient rules. (I am

speaking of the time when the British had newly arrived in this country,
but the behaviour of the younger generation was already causing
consternation among their elders.)
This was why up-to-date Brindaban quarrelled with old-fashioned
Yajnanath and said, ‘I’m leaving.’
Giving him instant permission to go, his father said for all to hear that
to give his son a single paisa would be as sinful as shedding a cow’s
blood. Brindaban, for his part, said that to take any of his father’s money
would be like shedding his mother’s blood. They then parted company.
After so many undisturbed years, the people of the village were rather
excited by this mini-revolution. And because Brindaban had been
deprived of his inheritance, they all tried – as hard as they could – to
distract Yajnanath from remorse at the rift with his son. They said that
to quarrel with one’s father over a mere wife could happen only in this
day and age. After all, if a wife goes she can quickly be replaced by
another – but if a father goes a second father cannot be found for love or
money! This was a sound argument; but in my view (Brindaban being
what he was) it would have cheered him somewhat rather than making
him penitent.
It is unlikely that Yajnanath felt much distress at his son’s departure.
It was a considerable financial saving, and furthermore it removed a
dread that had plagued him constantly – that Brindaban might one day
poison him: what little food he ate was tainted by this morbid notion. It
lessened somewhat when his daughter-in-law died; and now that his son
had left he felt much more relaxed.
Only one thing pained him. Brindaban had taken his four-year-old son
Gokulchandra with him. Gokul had cost relatively little to feed and
clothe, so Yajnanath had felt quite easy towards him. (Despite his regret
at the boy’s removal, however, he could not help making some rapid
calculations: how much he would save each month now that they had
both gone, how much each year, and how much capital would earn an
equivalent amount of interest.) It became difficult living in an empty
house, without Gokul’s mischief to disturb it. Yajnanath missed having
no one to pester him during the pūjās, no one pinching his food at mealtimes, no one running away with the inkpot when he did his accounts.
Washing and eating with no one to disturb him was a melancholy

business. Such undisturbed emptiness was what people gained after
death, he thought. It tugged at his heart to see, in his bedding and quilt,
holes made by his grandson, and, on the mat he sat on, ink-blots made
by the same artist. For making his dhoti unfit to wear in less than two
years, the pampered boy had been severely scolded by his grandfather.
Now Yajnanath felt tears in his eyes when he saw that dhoti in Gokul’s
bedroom, dirty, torn, abandoned, knotted all over. Instead of using it to
make wicks for lamps or for some other domestic purpose, he carefully
stored it in a trunk, and promised that if Gokul returned and ruined a
dhoti in even a single year, he would not scold him. But Gokul did not
return. Yajnanath seemed to be ageing much faster than before, and the
empty house felt emptier every day.
Yajnanath could not stay peacefully at home. Even in the afternoon,
when all high-born people take a siesta, he roamed about the village
with a hookah in his hand. During these silent afternoon walks, the
village-boys would abandon their games and, retreating to a safe
distance, bellow out locally composed rhymes about Yajnanath’s
miserliness. They none of them dared – in case their next meal was
spoiled by so bad an omen – to utter his real name: they gave him names
of their choosing. Old folk called him ‘Yajnanash’;1 why exactly the boys
should have called him ‘Bat’ is hard to explain. Perhaps they saw some
resemblance in his pale, sickly skin.

II
One day Yajnanath was wandering along mango-tree-shaded paths in
this way, when he saw a boy he had not previously seen taking
command of the others and directing them in entirely new sorts of
mischief. The boys were quite carried away by his forceful character and
fresh imagination. Instead of retreating like them at the sight of the old
man, the new boy went smartly right up to Yajnanath, and shaking out
his chadar released a chameleon, which ran over Yajnanath’s body and
off into the bushes – leaving him quivering and smarting at the shock.
The boys roared with amusement. A few paces on, Yajnanath’s gāmchā
was suddenly whipped off his shoulders, to reappear as a turban on the
new boy’s head.

Yajnanath was rather impressed by this novel kind of courtesy from a
young stranger. He had not had such daring familiarity from any boy for
a long time. By much shouting and coaxing, he managed to bring him to
heel.
‘What’s your name?’ he asked.
‘Nitai Pal.’
‘Where are you from?’
‘Shan’t tell you.’
‘Who’s your father?’
‘Shan’t tell you.’
‘Why won’t you tell me?’
‘I’ve run away from home.’
‘Why?’
‘My father wanted to send me to school.’
Yajnanath felt immediately that to send such a boy to school would be
a waste of money and that his father must be a fool.
‘Will you come and live in my house?’ he asked.
Raising no objection, the boy came along and settled in there as easily
as under the shade of a roadside tree. Not only that, he issued barefaced
orders for food and dress as if paid for in advance – and roundly
disputed such matters with the master of the house. It had been easy to
win arguments with his own son; but with someone else’s, Yajnanath
had to give in.

III
The villagers were amazed at the unprecedented affection that Yajnanath
showed for Nitai Pal. ‘The old man has not got much longer to live,’ they
thought, ‘and this strange boy will inherit all his wealth.’ They were all
very envious of him, and were determined to do him down. But the old
man hid him as closely as the ribs of his chest.
Sometimes the boy fretted and talked of leaving. Yajnanath would
appeal to his greed, saying, ‘You’ll get all my wealth when I die.’ The

boy was still young, but he knew the measure of this promise.
Then the villagers started to search for Nitai’s father. ‘How sore his
parents must be about him!’ they said. ‘What a wicked boy he is!’ They
hurled unrepeatable abuse at him – but their feelings were fired more by
selfish malice than moral outrage.
One day Yajnanath heard from a passer-by that a man called Damodar
Pal was looking for his lost son, and was on his way to the village. Nitai
was alarmed at this news – he was about to abandon his prospects and
flee; but Yajnanath reassured him, saying, ‘I’ll hide you where no one
will be able to find you. Not even the people in this village.’
‘Show me where,’ said the boy, very intrigued.
‘If I show you now, we’ll be found out,’ said Yajnanath. ‘I’ll show you
tonight.’
Nitai was excited by this promise of a new adventure. He vowed that
as soon as his father had gone, having failed to find him, he would use
the place to challenge his friends in a game of hide-and-seek. No one
would find him! It would be great fun. It amused him greatly that his
father had scoured the whole country for him and had failed to find him.
At midday Yajnanath locked the boy into the house and went out
somewhere. When he returned, Nitai pestered him with questions; and
as soon as dusk fell he asked if they could go.
‘It’s not night yet,’ said Yajnanath.
A little later Nitai said, ‘It’s night now, Dādā – let’s go.’
‘People are not asleep yet,’ said Yajnanath.
‘They’re asleep now – let’s go,’ said Nitai a few moments later.
The night wore on. Though he was doing his utmost to stay awake,
Nitai began to nod as he sat. At one in the morning, Yajnanath took
Nitai by the hand and led him along the dark paths of the sleeping
village. There was no sound anywhere, except for a dog barking from
time to time, answered loudly by other dogs near and far. Sometimes
nocturnal birds, startled by the sound of footsteps, flapped away through
the forest. Nitai nervously clasped Yajnanath’s hand.
After crossing several fields, they came at last to a tumbledown, godforsaken temple surrounded by jungle. ‘Here?’ said Nitai, rather crossly.
It was not at all as he had imagined. There was no mystery here. He had

sometimes had to spend nights in ruined temples like this after he had
run away from home. The place was not bad for hide-and-seek, but not
totally beyond discovery.
Yajnanath lifted up a slab in the middle of the temple. The boy saw
that beneath it there was a kind of cellar, with a lamp flickering. He was
surprised and intrigued by this, but rather frightened too. Yajnanath
climbed down a ladder into the cellar, and Nitai nervously followed him.
Down in the cellar, there were brass water-pots everywhere. There
was a mat for a deity in the midst of them, with vermilion, sandal-paste,
garlands and other pūjā-materials laid out in front. Nitai noticed with
amazement that the pots were full of rupee-coins and gold mohars.
‘Nitai,’ said Yajnanath, ‘I told you that I would give you all my money.
I haven’t got much – just these few pitcherfuls. Today I place it all in
your hands.’
Nitai jumped. ‘All? Aren’t you going to keep a single rupee for
yourself?’
‘It would bring leprosy to my hand if I took any of it. But one more
thing: if my long-lost grandson Gokulchandra, or his son or grandson or
great-grandson or any of his descendants come, then all this money must
be given to him or to them.’
Nitai decided that Yajnanath had gone mad. ‘All right,’ he agreed.
‘Now sit on this āsan,’ said Yajnanath.
‘Why?’
‘You must be worshipped.’
‘Why?’
‘It is the custom.’
The boy sat on the āsan. Yajnanath smeared sandalwood on his
forehead, and a spot of vermilion, and put a garland round his neck.
Then, sitting before him, he began to mutter mantras. Nitai was terrified
at finding himself worshipped as a god; terrified by the mantras. ‘Dādā,’
he cried.
Yajnanath continued reading the mantras, without replying. At length
he dragged the heavy pitchers, one by one, in front of the boy and
dedicated them, making him say each time: ‘I count and bequeath this

money to Gokulchandra Kunda son of Brindaban Kunda son of
Yajnanath Kunda son of Paramananda Kunda son of Prankrishna Kunda
son of Gadadhar Kunda son of Yudhisthira Kunda; or to Gokulchandra’s
son or grandson or great-grandson or any of his true descendants.’
The repetition of this formula over and over again had a stupefying
effect on the boy. His tongue gradually lost all movement. By the time
the ceremony was over, the air of the little cave-like room was thick
with smoke from the lamp and the breath of the two of them. Nitai’s
palate was dry; his arms and legs were feverishly hot; he was finding it
difficult to breathe. The lamp guttered and went out. In the darkness, the
boy sensed Yajnanath climbing up the ladder.
‘Where are you going, Dādā?’ he cried in alarm.
‘I’m leaving you,’ said Yajnanath. ‘You stay here: no one will find you.
But remember Gokulchandra son of Brindaban son of Yajnanath.’
He climbed out of the cellar and pulled the ladder up after him.
‘Dādā,’ gasped Nitai, barely able to speak, ‘I want to go back to my
father.’
Yajnanath put the slab back into place, and straining his ears just
managed to hear Nitai gasping the word, ‘Father.’ Then there was a
thud, and after that no sound at all.
Consigning his wealth in this way to the care of a yakṣa, Yajnanath
pressed some soil over the slab, and heaped it over with sand and broken
bricks from the temple. He covered the heap with clumps of grass, and
heeled in bushes from the forest. The night was almost over, but he
could not bring himself to leave the place. Every now and then he put
his ear to the ground. He imagined that he heard a crying from the
innermost depths of the Earth; that the night sky was filled with that one
sound; that all the people asleep in the world had been woken by it, and
were sitting on their beds, listening. The old man went on frenziedly
piling up more and more soil, as if trying to stop Earth’s mouth. But
somebody called out, ‘Father’ – and Yajnanath thumped the ground and
hissed, ‘Be quiet, everyone will hear you.’
Again, somebody called out, ‘Father.’
The old man noticed dawn arriving. Fearfully he left the temple and
emerged into open country. Even there someone was calling, ‘Father.’ He

turned in great alarm: there in front of him was his son Brindaban.
‘Father,’ said Brindaban, ‘I hear that my son has been hiding in your
house. Give him back to me.’
The old man lurched towards Brindaban. His eyes and face were
horribly distorted as he leant forward and said, ‘Your son?’
‘Yes,’ said Brindaban, ‘Gokul. Now his name is Nitai Pal and my name
is Damodar. You have a bad name with everyone round about, so we
changed our names – otherwise no one would have talked to us.’
The old man clawed at the sky with all his fingers, as if struggling to
clasp the air; then fell to the ground, fainting. When he came round
again, he hurried Brindaban to the temple. ‘Can you hear the crying?’ he
asked.
‘No,’ said Brindaban.
‘If you strain your ears, can’t you hear someone crying “Father”?’
‘No,’ said Brindaban.
The old man seemed relieved at this. From then on he would go round
asking everyone ‘Can you hear the crying?’ – and they all laughed at his
madman’s words.
About four years later, Yajnanath was on his death-bed. When the
world’s light grew dim in his eyes and breath began to fail, he suddenly
sat up in delirium; groping with both hands, he murmured, ‘Nitai –
someone has taken my ladder away.’ When he found no ladder out of the
vast, lightless, airless cellar he was in, he slumped back against the
pillows. Then he vanished, to the place which no one playing hide-andseek on earth can discover.

Skeleton
There was a whole skeleton hanging on the wall of the room next to the
one where the three of us slept when we were young. At night the bones
used to clatter as the breeze stirred them. During the day we ourselves
had to stir them: we were, at that time, studying meghnād-badh kābya
with a pundit, and anatomy with a student from the Campbell Medical
School. Our guardian wanted us to become instant experts in all fields of
learning. To reveal how far his wishes were fulfilled would be
superfluous to those who know us and unwise to those who do not.
This was all a long time ago. Meanwhile the skeleton disappeared
from the room, and anatomical knowledge from our heads – heaven
knows where.
A few days ago there was, for some reason, a shortage of space in the
house and I had to spend the night in the room. Unused to being there, I
couldn’t sleep. I tossed and turned, and heard the big bell of the church
clock nearly every time it struck. The oil-lamp in the corner of the room
guttered, and five minutes later went out completely. Recently there had
been a couple of deaths in our household – so the extinction of the lamp
easily aroused morbid thoughts. The flame of a lamp could fade into
eternal darkness at one in the morning; the little flame of a man’s life
could also go out one day or night and be forgotten. Gradually the
memory of the skeleton came to me. As I imagined the life of the person
whose skeleton it was, I suddenly felt a kind of live presence groping
along the wall and circling round my mosquito-net, breathing audibly. It
seemed to be looking for something, pacing rapidly round the room as it
failed to find it. I knew perfectly well that this was all fabricated by my
sleepless overheated brain: it was the blood throbbing in my head that
sounded like rapid footsteps. Nevertheless, I felt very odd. Trying to
break out of my senseless fear, I called, ‘Who’s there?’ The footsteps
stopped right next to my mosquito-net and I heard an answer: ‘Me. I’ve
come to see where my skeleton might have gone.’
I decided I really could not show such fear to a creature of my

imagination; so, clutching my pillow grimly, I said in a cheery voice as if
speaking to an old friend, ‘The right sort of task for the middle of the
night! You still need that skeleton?’
From the darkness right against the mosquito-net the reply came,
‘How could I not? My breast-bone was part of it – my twenty-six-yearold youth flowered around it. How could I not wish to see it again?’
‘I understand what you mean,’ I replied hastily. ‘Finish searching and
then go. I’m trying to get some sleep.’
‘You’re alone, I see,’ said the voice. ‘Then let me sit down a little. Let
me talk to you. Thirty-five years ago I too sat next to men and chatted
with them. For thirty-five years I have wandered about, moaning with
the wind of cremation-grounds. Today I want to sit next to you and talk
like a human being again.’
I sensed that someone had sat down next to my mosquito-net. Seeing
no way out, I said brightly, ‘Fine. Talk about whatever would make you
feel better.’
‘The most amusing story I have,’ she said, ‘is the story of my life.’
The church clock struck two.
‘When I was alive and young there was someone I feared like death. My
husband. I felt like a fish caught on a hook. That is, a completely
unknown animal had hauled me up on a hook, snatched me out of the
cool, deep, protective waters of my home, with no chance of escape.
Two months after my marriage, my husband died. The grief that was
expected of me was supplied in full by my in-laws. My father-in-law,
pointing to numerous signs, told my mother-in-law that I was what the
Shastras called a “poison-bride”. I remember that distinctly. Are you
listening? Are you enjoying the story?’
‘Very much,’ I said. ‘It’s very amusing so far.’
‘Then listen. I returned joyfully to my father’s house. I grew up.
People tried to disguise it from me, but I well knew that women as
beautiful as I was are rare. Do you agree?’
‘Quite possibly. But I have never seen you.’
‘Never seen me? Why? You saw my skeleton! But I mustn’t tease you.
How can I prove to you that in those empty eye-sockets there were big,

wide, black eyes; that the skeleton’s hideous toothy grin bore no
comparison with the sweet smile that played on my red lips? It would be
both amusing and annoying to describe to you the grace, the youth, the
firm unblemished fullness that ripened day by day on those long dry
pieces of bone! The anatomy of that body of mine was beyond even the
greatest doctors! Indeed a doctor once said to his best friend that I was a
“golden lotus”; meaning that anatomy and physiology could be learnt
from any other human body, but I was unique – a miraculous flower.
Does a golden lotus have a skeleton inside? When I moved, I knew that I
was like a diamond sparkling in all directions when you turn it – such
waves of natural beauty broke forth on all sides with my every gesture. I
would sometimes gaze at my arms – arms that could have sweetly
subdued the world’s most passionate men like a horse’s bridle. Do you
remember Subhadra when she scooped up Arjuna and proudly drove
him in her chariot astonishing heaven, earth and the nether world?
Equal to hers were those delicate, shapely arms of mine, those pink
palms, those beautifully tapered fingers. But that shameless, naked,
unadorned skeleton bore false witness to me. I was speechless and
helpless then, and angrier with you than anyone else in the world. I
longed to stand before you as I was at sixteen, in the living, youthful
flush of my beauty; to rob you of sleep; to disrupt your anatomy-learning
and drive it away.’
‘If you had a body,’ I said, ‘I would touch it and swear that not a trace
of that learning remains in my mind. Your world-enchanting youthful
beauty is all I am aware of now, radiantly etched against the night’s dark
background – nothing but that!’
‘I had no female friend to keep me company. My elder brother had
resolved not to get married. There were no other women in the house. I
used to sit under a tree in the garden and imagine that the whole of
Nature was in love with me, that all the stars were eyeing me, that the
wind was sidling past me sighing deeply, that the grass on which my legs
were stretched out would, were it conscious, quickly swoon to
unconsciousness again. I supposed that all the world’s young men were
silently assembled round my feet like a clump of grass. What senseless
anguish I felt!
‘When my brother’s friend Shashishekhar passed out of medical

college, he became our family doctor. I had previously often observed
him secretly. My brother was a very peculiar person – he seemed never
to look at the world with his eyes open: as if there were never enough
space in the world for him, and he therefore had to retreat to the
outermost edge of it. Shashishekhar was his only friend, so of all the
young men outside he was the one I watched most often. And when in
the evening I sat like an empress at the foot of my flowering tree, all the
world’s young men sat at my feet in Shashishekhar’s image. Are you
listening? What are you thinking?’
‘I’m thinking,’ I said with a sigh, ‘that I should have liked to have been
born as Shashishekhar.’
‘Listen to the whole story first. One day in the rainy season I caught a
fever. The doctor came to see me. It was our first meeting. I turned my
face towards the window, so that the red light of evening might mask
my pallor. When the doctor came into the room and looked at my face, I
imagined that I myself was the doctor looking at my face. In the evening
light it was as delicate as a slightly wilted flower laid on a soft pillow;
unkempt strands of hair had fallen on to my forehead, and my shyly
lowered eyelashes cast shadows on to my cheeks. The doctor, speaking
in a low, gentle voice, told my brother he would need to feel my pulse. I
slid my rounded, listless arm out from underneath the coverings.
Glancing at it, I reflected that it would have looked better with blue
glass-bangles on it. As the doctor felt my sickly pulse, he was more
unsettled than any doctor I had known. His fingers trembled most
incompetently. He could feel the heat of my fever; I also had a sense of
how his own pulse was racing. Don’t you believe me?’
‘I don’t see any reason for disbelieving you,’ I said. ‘A man’s pulse
varies according to circumstances.’
‘Gradually, after three or four more periods of illness and recovery, I
found that at my imaginary evening court the millions of men in the
world had reduced themselves to one. My world was almost deserted – a
single doctor and a single patient were all that were left. I would
surreptitiously put on a light-orange-coloured sari, plait a string of belflowers into my hair, and sit in the garden with a mirror in my hand.
Why? For the pleasure one gets from looking at oneself? But in fact I was
not looking at myself, for it was not I who did so. I had become two

people, as I sat alone. I saw myself as the doctor saw me; I loved and
worshipped and was enraptured; yet within me deep sighs heaved like
the moaning evening wind.
‘From that time on I was no longer alone. When I walked, casting my
eyes down to look at the way my toes pressed the ground, I wondered
how our newly qualified doctor would like my footsteps; in the
afternoon, when the heat shimmered outside the window, and there was
no sound except the cry of a kite flying high in the sky or toy-sellers
outside our garden-fence calling, “Toys for sale, bangles for sale”, I
would spread out a clean sheet and lie down. I would stretch a naked
arm casually across my soft bed and pretend that a certain someone had
seen my arm and the way I stretched it out, had lifted it up in both
hands, had planted a kiss on my pink palm and had crept out again.
What would you think of the story if it ended here?’
‘Not bad,’ I replied. ‘Still a bit incomplete – but I would happily spend
the rest of the night finishing it off in my mind.’
‘But it would be a very serious story then! What about the ironic twist
at the end? What about the skeleton within, with all its teeth showing?
Listen to what happened next. The doctor’s practice built up, and he was
able to open a small surgery on the ground floor of our house. I would
sometimes jokingly ask him about medicines, poisons, what would make
a man die quickly, and so on. The doctor spoke freely about his
profession. As I listened, Death became as familiar as a relative. Love
and Death were the only things that were real to me.
‘My story is almost finished – there is not much more of it.’
‘And the night is almost over too,’ I murmured.
‘After a while I noticed that the doctor had become distracted,
seemingly embarrassed in my company. Then one day I saw him all
dressed up, asking if he could borrow my brother’s carriage – he was
going somewhere that night. I could not bear to remain in ignorance. I
went to my brother and eventually managed to ask, “Tell me, Dādā,
where is the doctor going to tonight in the carriage?”
‘ “To die,” said my brother laconically.
‘ “No, tell me truly,” I said.
‘ “To get married,” he said, more openly than before.

‘ “You don’t say!” I said, laughing loudly.
‘Bit by bit I discovered that the doctor would get 12,000 rupees from
the marriage. But what was his purpose in shaming me by keeping his
plans secret? Had I fallen at his feet and told him I would die of heartbreak if he married? Men can never be trusted. I learnt this in one fell
swoop, from the only man I cared about in the world.
‘Just before dusk, when the doctor came into the room after seeing his
patients, I laughed raucously and said, “Well, Doctor – so today you’re
getting married?”
‘The doctor was not only embarrassed at my frankness, he became
extremely glum.
‘ “Isn’t there going to be any band or music?” I asked.
‘ “Is marrying a matter for such rejoicing?” he said with a slight sigh.
‘I became quite overcome with laughter. I had never heard such a
thing. “That won’t do,” I said. “There must be a band, there must be
lights.”
‘I got my brother so worked up that he immediately set about
organizing festivities on a grand scale. I chatted on about what would
happen when the bride came into the house, what I would do. I asked,
“Well, Doctor – will you go around feeling lady-patients’ pulses now?”
Although human thoughts, especially a man’s thoughts, cannot be
directly perceived, I can nevertheless swear that my words struck the
doctor like a spear in the chest.
‘The ceremony was fixed for the middle of the night. That evening the
doctor sat out on the roof with my brother drinking a glass or two of
liquor. It was their habit to do this. The moon rose slowly in the sky. I
went to them and said, still laughing, “Has the Doctor Babu forgotten?
The show is about to start!”
A minor detail here: I had, beforehand, gone secretly into the doctor’s
surgery to collect some powder, and had taken my chance to mix a small
part of it into the doctor’s glass, unseen by anyone. I had learnt from the
doctor which powders were fatal. The doctor swallowed the drink in one
gulp, and looking at me piteously said in a slightly choked and husky
voice, “I must be off now.”
‘Flute-music began to play. I put on a Benares sari, and all the

ornaments from my jewellery-chest; and I smeared vermilion liberally
into my parting. Then I spread out my bedding under my favourite bakul
tree. It was a beautiful night. Full, pure moonlight. A south wind blew
away the tiredness of a sleeping world. The whole garden was fragrant
with bel-blossoms and jasmine. When the sound of the flute had faded
into the distance; when the moonlight had begun to fade, and the whole
world around me – trees, sky, my life-long home – seemed unreal, I
closed my eyes and smiled.
‘My wish was that when people came and found me, that slight smile
would still be intoxicatingly present on my red lips. My wish was that
when I slowly entered my bridal-chamber of Eternal Night, I would take
that smile with me. But where was the bridal-chamber? Where was my
bridal attire? Woken by a clattering sound within me, I found three boys
learning anatomy from me. In a breast that had throbbed with joy and
sorrow, where, daily, the petals of youth had unfolded one by one, a
teacher was pointing out with his cane which bone was which. And what
trace was there now of the final smile I had formed with my lips?’
‘How did you find my story?’
‘Hilarious,’ I replied.
The first crow cawed. ‘Are you still there?’ I asked.
There was no reply. Dawn-light was entering the room.

A Single Night
I went to school with Surabala, and we played ‘getting married’ games
together. Surabala’s mother was very affectionate towards me whenever
I went to their house. Seeing us as a pair, she would murmur to herself,
‘They’re meant for each other!’ I was young, but I understood her drift
fairly well. The feeling that I had a greater than normal claim to
Surabala fixed itself in my mind. I became so puffed up with this feeling
that I tended to boss her about. She meekly obeyed all my orders and
endured my punishments. She was praised in the neighbourhood for her
beauty, but beauty meant nothing to my barbarous young eyes: I merely
knew that Surabala had been born to acknowledge my lordship over her
– hence my inconsiderate behaviour.
My father was the chief rent-collector on the Chaudhuris’ estate. His
hope was that he would train me in estate-management when I was
grown up, and find me a job as a land-agent somewhere. But I didn’t like
that idea at all. My ambitions were as high as our neighbour’s son
Nilratan’s, who ran away to Calcutta to study and had become chief
clerk to a Collector. Even if I didn’t become that, I was determined to be
at least Head Clerk in a magistrate’s court. I had always noticed how
respectful my father was towards legal officers of that kind. I had known
since childhood that it was necessary, on various occasions, to make
offerings to them of fish, vegetables and money; so I gave a specially
privileged position in my heart to court employees, even to the peons.
They were the most venerated of Bengal’s deities, new miniature
editions of her millions of gods. In pursuing prosperity, people placed
greater trust in them than in bountiful Ganesh himself – so all the tribute
that Ganesh formerly received now went to them.
Inspired by Nilratan’s example, I also took my chance to run away to
Calcutta. First I stayed with an acquaintance from my home village; later
my father began to give me some help towards my education. My studies
proceeded along conventional lines.
In addition, I attended meetings and assemblies. I had no doubt that it

would soon become necessary for me to lay down my life for my
country. But I had no idea how to accomplish so momentous an act, and
no one to look to for an example. I was not, however, short of
enthusiasm. We were village-boys, and had not learnt to ridicule
everything like the smart boys of Calcutta; so our zeal was unshakeable.
The leaders at our meetings gave speeches, but we used to wander about
from house to house in the heat of the day, without lunch, begging for
subscriptions; or we stood by the roadside giving out handbills; or we
arranged benches and chairs before meetings. We were ready to roll up
our sleeves and fight at the slightest word against our leaders. But to the
smart boys of Calcutta, all this merely demonstrated our rural naïvety.
I had come to qualify myself to be a Head Clerk or Superintendent;
but I was actually preparing to become Mazzini or Garibaldi. Meanwhile
my father and Surabala’s father agreed that I should be married to her. I
had run away to Calcutta at the age of fifteen, when Surabala was eight;
now I was eighteen. In my father’s opinion my marriageable age was
elapsing. But I vowed I would never marry: I would die for my country
instead. I told my father I would not marry until my studies were
completely finished.
Two or three months later I heard that Surabala had been married to
the lawyer Ramlochan Babu. I was busy collecting subscriptions for
down-trodden India, so I attached no importance to the news.
I passed into college, and was about to take my second-year exams
when news came of my father’s death. I was not the only one in the
family – I had my mother and two sisters. So I had to leave college and
search for work. With great difficulty I managed to get a post as assistant
master in a secondary school in a small town in Naukhali District. I told
myself I had found the right sort of work. My guidance and
encouragement would raise each pupil to be a leader of the new India.
I started work. I found that the coming exam was much more
demanding than the new India. The headmaster objected if I breathed a
single word to the pupils outside Grammar and Algebra. In a couple of
months my enthusiasm had faded away. I became one of those dull
individuals who sits and broods when he is at home; who, when
working, shoulders his plough with his head bowed, whipped from
behind, meekly breaking up earth; content at night to stuff his belly with

cattle-fodder; no energy or enterprise in him at all.
For fear of fire, one of the teachers had to live on the school premises.
I was unmarried, so this duty fell upon me. I lived in a hut adjoining the
large, thatched school-building. The school was rather isolated; it stood
next to a big pond. There were betel-nut, coconut and coral trees all
around; a pair of huge old nim trees – adjacent to each other and to the
schoolhouse itself – gave shade.
There is something which I haven’t mentioned so far and which for a
long time I didn’t think worthy of mention. The government lawyer
here, Ramlochan Ray, lived quite near our schoolhouse, and I knew that
his wife – my childhood companion Surabala – was there with him.
I became acquainted with Ramlochan Babu. I’m not sure if he was
aware that as a child I had known Surabala, and when we met I did not
think it appropriate to mention this. I did not particularly think about
the fact that Surabala had at one time been involved with my life.
One day, during a school holiday, I went along to Ramlochan’s house
for a chat. I can’t remember what we talked about – probably India’s
present plight. Not that he was very well-informed or concerned about
the subject, but it was a way of passing an hour-and-a-half or so,
smoking, and indulging in pleasurable gloom. As we talked I heard in
the next room the soft tinkling of bangles, the rustle of garments, the
sound of footsteps; it wasn’t hard to deduce that inquisitive eyes were
observing me through the half-open window. Suddenly I remembered
those eyes – large eyes full of trust, simplicity and childish devotion:
black pupils, dark eyelashes, an ever-calm gaze. Something seemed to
clench my heart, and an anguish throbbed within me.
I returned to my hut, but the pain remained. Writing and reading
were no distraction from it; it oppressed me like a huge weight in my
chest, thudding in my veins. In the evening I calmed down a little and
asked myself why I should be in such a state. The inner answer came,
‘You are wondering why you lost your Surabala.’
I replied, ‘But I gave her up willingly. I couldn’t let her wait for me for
ever.’
Someone within me said, ‘You could have got her if you had wanted

then, but now nothing whatever you can do will give you the right even
to see her. However close the Surabala of your childhood lives to you
now, however often you hear the tinkle of her bangles or feel the scent
of her hair brushing past you, there will always be a wall keeping you
apart.’
‘No matter,’ I said, ‘who is Surabala to me?’
The reply came: ‘Surabala is not yours today, but think what she could
have been to you!’
That was true. Surabala could have been mine. She could have been
my closest, most intimate companion; she could have shared all my
sorrows and joys; but now she was so far away, so much someone else’s,
seeing her now was forbidden, it was a fault to speak to her, a sin to
think about her. And a certain Ramlochan Babu, who was nobody
before, was suddenly in the way. By mouthing a few mantras, he had
whisked Surabala away from everyone else in the world.
I am not about to propose a new social morality; I do not wish to
break convention or tear away restrictions. I am merely expressing my
real feelings. Are all the feelings that arise in one’s mind reasonable? I
could not drive from my mind the conviction that the Surabala who
reigned behind Ramlochan’s portals was more mine than his. I admit this
feeling was highly illogical and improper, but it was not unnatural.
I was now unable to concentrate on my work. At midday, as pupils
burbled over their books, and everything outside shimmered, and a soft
warm breeze brought the scent of the flowers of the nim trees, I yearned
– what I yearned for I don’t know – but this much I can say: I did not
want to spend the rest of my life correcting the grammar of India’s
future hopefuls. I hated sitting alone in my large room after school
hours, yet I couldn’t bear anyone coming to see me. At dusk I listened to
the meaningless rustle of the betel-nut and coconut trees by the pond,
and reflected on life. What a baffling tangle! No one thinks of doing the
right thing at the right time; instead, wrong and unsettling desires come
at the wrong time. You, worthless though you are, could have been
Surabala’s husband and lived out your days in contentment. You wanted
to be Garibaldi, but look what you became – an assistant master in a
village school! And the lawyer Ramlochan Ray, why did he need to be
Surabala’s husband? She was nothing to him, right up to the wedding:

he married her without giving her a thought, became a government
lawyer and was earning nicely, thank you! He ticked her off if the milk
smelled of smoke, and when he was in a good mood he ordered some
jewellery for her. He was plump, wore a long coat, was perfectly pleased
with life, never spent his evenings sitting by the pond staring at the stars
and regretting the past.
Ramlochan had to go away for a few days on a big court-case. Surabala
must have been as lonely in her house as I was in mine.
It was Monday, I remember. The sky had been cloudy since dawn. At
ten, rain began to patter down gently. Seeing the look of the sky, the
headmaster closed the school early. Large chunks of black cloud rolled
across the sky all day, as if grandly preparing for something. The next
day torrential rain started in the afternoon, and a storm blew up. It
rained harder and harder through the night and the wind blew more and
more fiercely. At first it had blown from the east, but it gradually swung
round to the north and north-east.
It was pointless trying to sleep that night. I remembered that Surabala
was alone in her house. The schoolhouse was much sturdier than hers. I
several times thought of fetching her over to the school – I could spend
the night on the raised bank of the pond. But I could not bring myself to
do this.
At about one or one-thirty in the morning the roar of flood-waters
became audible – a tidal wave was approaching from the sea. I left my
room and went outside. I made my way to Surabala’s house. The bank of
the pond was on my way – I managed to wade as far as that, up to my
knees in water. I scrambled up on to the bank, but a second wave dashed
against it. Part of the bank was about six or seven feet high. As I climbed
up on to it, someone else was climbing from the other side. I knew with
every fibre of my being who that person was; and I had no doubt that
she knew who I was.
We stood alone on an island nine feet long, everything around us
submerged in water. It was like the end of the world – no stars in the
sky, all earthly lamps extinguished. There would have been no harm in
saying something, but no word was spoken. I didn’t even ask if she was
all right, nor did she ask me. We just stood, staring into the darkness. At

our feet, deep, black, deadly waters roared and surged.
Surabala had abandoned the world to be with me now. She had no
one but me. The Surabala of my childhood had floated into my life from
some previous existence, from some ancient mysterious darkness; she
had entered the sunlight and moonlight of this crowded world to join me
at my side. Now, years later, she had left the light and the crowds to be
with me alone in this terrifying, deserted, apocalyptic darkness. As a
young budding flower, she had been thrown near me on to the stream of
life; now, as a full-bloomed flower, she had again been thrown near me,
on the stream of death. If but one more wave had come, we would have
been shed from our slender, separate stems of existence and become one.
But better that the wave did not come. Better that Surabala should live
in happiness with her husband, home and children. Enough that I stood
for a single night on the shore of the apocalypse, and tasted eternal joy.
The night was nearly over. The wind died down; the waters receded.
Surabala, without saying a word, returned home, and I also went silently
to my room. I reflected: I did not become a Collector’s chief clerk; I did
not become Court Clerk; I did not become Garibaldi; I became an
assistant master in a run-down school. In my entire life, only once – for a
brief single night – did I touch Eternity. Only on that one night, out of
all my days and nights, was my trivial existence fulfilled.

Fool’s Gold1
Adyanath and Baidyanath Chakrabarti were co-legatees; but Baidyanath
was much the worse off of the two. His father Maheshchandra had no
head for money, and left the management of his affairs to his elder
brother Shibanath. In return, Shibanath, with many a soothing word,
appropriated the inheritance to himself. Some Company Bonds were all
that was left to Baidyanath, and were his only security in the rough
ocean of life. After much searching, Shibanath managed to marry his son
Adyanath to a rich man’s only daughter, thereby giving himself a further
opportunity to increase his wealth. Maheshchandra gave his son to the
eldest of the seven daughters of a poor Brahmin he had taken pity on,
and asked for not a paisa in dowry. He would have taken all seven
daughters into his home; but he had only one son – and besides, the
Brahmin didn’t request this. But he gave him more than enough help
with the cost of marrying them off.
After his father’s death, Baidyanath was perfectly happy and satisfied
with the Company Bonds. He gave no thought to earning a living. He
occupied himself by cutting branches off trees and carefully carving
them into walking-sticks. If young men or boys pressed him for one of
these, he gave it away. He also spent many hours making – out of sheer
generosity – fishing-rods, kites and reels. These required a great deal of
careful carving and smoothing; and though the labour and time were of
little benefit to his family, handiwork of this kind gave him enormous
satisfaction. At times when, under every sacred caṇdimaṇdap, the air
became thick with village feuds and intrigues, Baidyanath would often
be seen alone on his verandah, working from dawn to afternoon and
between siesta-time and evening, with a penknife and a piece of wood.
Through the grace of Shashti – and in defiance of his enemies –
Baidyanath produced two sons and one daughter.
His wife Mokshada, however, grew daily more dissatisfied. Why did they
not have the home comforts that Adyanath’s family enjoyed? It was

against all reason that Mokshada should be deprived of the ornaments,
Benares saris, refined conversation and imperious manners that
Adyanath’s wife Bindhyabasini had! They were the same family, after
all. This higher standard of living had been achieved by cheating a
brother out of his inheritance. The more she heard about her father-inlaw, the more resentful Mokshada felt towards his only son. Nothing in
her own house pleased her. Everything was inconvenient and
humiliating. The beds were not fit for carrying a corpse on; the walls
were so decayed that even an orphaned titmouse would not want to live
in them, and the furnishings would make a saint weep. Men are too
cowardly to oppose such exaggerated complaints. All Baidyanath could
do was sit on his verandah and scrape at sticks with doubled
concentration.
But to keep silence is not a permanent way of avoiding trouble.
Sometimes Mokshada would interrupt her husband’s woodcarving and
call him into the house. Solemnly, looking away from him, she said,
‘Stop the milkman from delivering milk.’
Baidyanath would be silent for a moment and then say, head bowed,
‘How can I stop the milk? What will the children drink?’
‘Stale rice-water,’ his wife replied.
Or else, on other days, she would try a different tack: she would call
him and say, ‘I give up. You do what needs to be done.’
‘What needs to be done?’ Baidyanath asked wearily.
‘You buy the food this month,’ she replied. Then she gave him a
shopping list worthy of a royal ceremonial feast. If Baidyanath plucked
up courage to ask, ‘Do we really need all this?’, she answered, ‘I suppose
if the children didn’t eat and they died and I too, you’d be able to run
the house on your own, nice and cheaply!’
Baidyanath gradually realized he could not go on carving walkingsticks. Some solution would have to be found. But employment or
business seemed out of the question. He needed to discover a short cut
that would take him straight to Kubera’s treasure-house.
One night he lay in bed and prayed passionately: ‘O Mother Durga, if
only you could reveal in a dream a patent medicine for a serious illness!
I’d take care of advertising it in the papers.’ But that night he dreamed

his wife had furiously vowed she would ‘marry again when she was
widowed’. Baidyanath had objected to this by asking her where she
would find – in their present state of poverty – the necessary ornaments.
She refuted his objection by saying that widows didn’t need ornaments
to get married. He was groping vainly for some kind of clinching
rejoinder, when he woke up and saw that it was morning; and on
realizing why it was truly not possible for his wife to remarry, he felt
rather dejected.
The next day, after his morning rites and ablutions, he was sitting alone
making a kite-string, when a sannyāsī arrived at his door, chanting
blessings. Instantly Baidyanath had a brilliant vision of future wealth. He
invited the sannyāsī in, and fed and welcomed him lavishly. He
managed, with difficulty, to establish that the sannyāsī could make gold,
and was willing to impart his method.
Mokshada was enthralled. Like people with jaundice finding that
everything looks yellow, the world seemed full of gold to her. As her
imagination magically turned beds, furnishings and the walls of the
house to gold, she mentally invited Bindhyabasini for a visit. The
sannyāsī, meanwhile, consumed two seers of milk a day and one-and-ahalf seers of mohanbhog; and by extracting the Company Bonds from
Baidyanath raised large sums of money.
The seekers of fishing-rods, sticks and reels had to go away
disappointed when they knocked on Baidyanath’s door. His children
might not get their meals on time, might fall and bruise their foreheads,
might shake the heavens with their howls, but neither parent took
notice. They sat stock-still in front of the sannyāsī’s cauldron –
unblinking, speechless. The restless flames, casting reflections, turned
the pupils of their eyes into touchstones. Their gaze grew red and fiery
as a setting sun.
When two of the Company Bonds had become burnt offerings to that
gold-creating fire, the sannyāsī said encouragingly, ‘Tomorrow the gold
colour will come.’
They couldn’t sleep that night: husband and wife lay building a city of
gold in their minds. Sometimes they argued over details, but were so
happy that they quickly reached agreement. They were perfectly willing

to forgo their individual views, so deep was their marital harmony that
night.
The next day the sannyāsī was nowhere to be found. The gold all
around them was obliterated: even the rays of the sun fell dark. Beds,
furnishings and walls looked four times poorer and shabbier. If
Baidyanath now offered some sort of trivial opinion on a domestic
matter, his wife would say sweetly, ‘You’ve shown how intelligent you
are. Why not leave off for a bit?’ He was utterly crushed. Mokshada
acted superior, as if she had not believed for a minute in the golden
mirage.
The crestfallen Baidyanath tried to think of ways to please his wife.
One day he produced a present in a square packet, and smiling broadly,
nodding his head sagely, said, ‘Guess what I’ve brought you.’
Concealing her curiosity she said casually, ‘How should I know? I’m
not a soothsayer.’ Without further ado, Baidyanath slowly untied the
knots in the string, blew the dust off the wrapping-paper, and gingerly
unfolded the paper to reveal an ‘Art Studio’ coloured print of the ten
forms of Durga. Turning it to the light, he held it up before his wife. She
immediately thought of the English oil-paintings hanging in
Bindhyabasini’s bedroom. In a tone of excessive indifference she said,
‘Well, I never. You can hang it in your sitting-room and admire it there.
It’s not my style.’ Baidyanath glumly realized that, along with other
skills, God had denied him the difficult art of pleasing his wife.
Meanwhile Mokshada was consulting fortune-tellers of every kind,
showing them her palms or getting them to study her horoscope. They
all said her husband would outlive her. Although she was not very
enthused by that joyous prospect, her curiosity remained unabated. She
heard that her childbearing chances were good, that the house would
soon be full of sons and daughters: she was not overjoyed about that.
Eventually, however, an astrologer told her he would burn every one of
his scrolls if Baidyanath failed to find hidden treasure within a few
years. So powerful an oath convinced Mokshada of the truth of his
prediction. The astrologer took his leave, lavishly rewarded, but life now
became unbearable for Baidyanath. There were several common-orgarden routes to wealth, such as farming, employment, theft or

deception. But there was no standard way of finding hidden treasure. So
the more Mokshada urged him and scolded him the less he could see
which road to take. He could not decide where to begin digging, which
pond to dredge, which wall in the house to demolish.
Greatly annoyed, Mokshada told her husband that she never knew a
man could have dung instead of brains in his head. ‘Get moving!’ she
said. ‘Do you think the sky will rain money if you sit gaping like that?’
She was right, and Baidyanath too was desperate to make some sort of
move; but where and by what means, no one could tell him. So he
continued to sit on the verandah carving sticks.
It was the month of Āśvin, and the Durgā-pūjā was drawing near. From
the fourth of the month on, boats were arriving at the ghāt. People were
returning home. They brought baskets of arum, pumpkins, dry coconuts;
trunkfuls of clothes, umbrellas and shoes for the children; perfume, soap,
new story-books and sweet-smelling coconut-oil for their loved ones.
Autumn sunshine filled the wide, cloudless sky like a festive smile;
ripening paddy-fields rippled; glossy, rain-washed leaves rustled in the
fresh cool breeze; and returning villagers, in raw-silk China-coats, made
their way home along field-paths. Each had an umbrella over his head,
and a twisted chadar swinging from his shoulder.
Baidyanath sat and watched, and sighed from the bottom of his heart.
He compared his joyless home with the atmosphere of festivity and
homecoming in so many other houses, and said to himself, ‘Why did God
make me so useless?’
His sons rose at dawn to see the image of Durga being made in
Adyanath’s yard. At meal-times the maid had to go and drag them home.
Baidyanath sat and reflected on the fruitlessness of his life amidst such
universal festivity. Rescuing his two sons from the maid, he took them
on to his lap and hugged them, and asked the elder one, ‘Well, Abu, tell
me what you would like for the pūjā?’
‘I’d like a model boat, Father,’ said Abinash at once.
The younger one, not wanting to be inferior to his brother in any
respect, said, ‘I’d like a boat too, Father.’
Sons worthy of their father! All he could do was make useless things,

so that was what they wanted. ‘Very well,’ he said.
Meanwhile a paternal uncle of Mokshada’s – a lawyer – had returned
home from Benares for the pūjā-holidays. Mokshada visited his house
several days running. One day she said to her husband, ‘I think you
should go to Benares.’ Baidyanath immediately imagined that his death
was near, that astrologers had discovered the date in his horoscope. His
partner-in-life had found out, and was making preparations for his life
beyond death. She told him, however, that there were rumours about a
house in Benares where hidden treasure might be found: he must go and
buy the house and bring home the treasure.
‘Heaven forbid,’ said Baidyanath. ‘I can’t go to Benares.’ He had never
been away from home. Women – so say the writers of the ancient
Shastras – know instinctively how to make a family man adopt a life of
asceticism. Mokshada’s rhetoric filled the house like chilli-smoke; but it
only made poor Baidyanath’s eyes water: it failed to make him go to
Benares.
Two or three days went by. Baidyanath sat cutting, carving and gluing
pieces of wood to make two model boats. He fitted them with masts; cut
up cloth to fix as sails; gave each a red cotton pennant; added oars and
rudders. He even gave them passengers and a tiny helmsman. In all this
he showed great care and astonishing skill. There is no boy alive whose
heart would not have skipped a beat at the sight of such boats. So when
Baidyanath gave them to his sons on the eve of the seventh day of the
pūjā, they danced for joy. Even the shell of a boat would have been
sufficient, but these had rudders, sails, boatmen in position: they were
wonderful.
Attracted by the whoops of delight from the boys, Mokshada came
and saw their indigent father’s pūjā presents. At the sight, she raged,
sobbed and beat her brow; then she snatched the two boats and threw
them out of the window. Others were getting gold necklaces, satin shirts,
embroidered caps: this miserable husband of hers had fobbed his sons off
with two toy boats! Not a paisa had been spent on them; he’d made
them himself!
The younger boy wailed loudly. ‘Stupid boy,’ she said, giving him a
clout. The elder boy forgot his own distress when he saw his father’s
face. Trying to seem cheerful, he said, ‘I’ll look for the boats early

tomorrow morning, Father, and bring them back.’
The next day Baidyanath agreed to go to Benares. But where was the
necessary money? His wife sold some jewellery to raise cash: jewellery
from his grandmother’s era. Heavy, pure gold ornaments like that are
unobtainable today. Baidyanath felt he was going to his death. He
embraced and kissed his children and left home with tears in his eyes.
Even Mokshada wept.
The owner of the house in Benares was a client of Mokshada’s uncle.
Probably that was why it was sold at such a steep price. Baidyanath took
sole possession of it. It was right on the river: water lapped against its
foundations.
At night Baidyanath shivered all over. He lay in an empty room,
wrapped in his chadar, with a lamp by his pillow – but he couldn’t sleep.
At dead of night, when all noise outside had stopped, he was roused by a
clinking noise from somewhere. It was faint, but clear – as if the King of
the Underworld’s treasurer was sitting and counting money. Baidyanath
was afraid, but was also curious and full of impossible hope. Carrying
the lamp in his trembling hand, he went round the rooms of the house. If
he went into one room the sound seemed to be coming from another; if
he went to that room it seemed to be coming from the previous one. He
spent the whole night wandering from room to room. When day came,
the underground clinking blended with other sounds, and was no longer
distinct.
The following night, at two or three o’clock, when the world was
asleep, the noise started again. Baidyanath’s heart was pounding. He
could not decide where to go to trace the noise. In a desert the gurgle of
water can sometimes be heard, but it is impossible to say where it is
coming from: one is afraid of losing it completely by following a false
path. The thirsty traveller stands stock still, straining his ears with all his
might, his thirst growing and growing – Baidyanath was like that.
He spent many days in this state of uncertainty. Sleeplessness and
futile anxiety spread deep furrows over his formerly serene and kindly
face. His sunken eyes blazed like desert sand in the afternoon. Then, one
night, at two o’clock, he locked all the doors in the house and started to
tap the floors with a crowbar. The floor of a small side room sounded

hollow. While the rest of the town slept, Baidyanath crouched alone,
digging down into the floor. When it was nearly dawn, his excavations
were complete. He saw that there was a sort of lower room – in the
darkness of the night he was not brave enough to step down into it
recklessly. He spread his bedding over the hole and lay down. But the
clinking noise was so distinct now that he had to get up again – though
he was not prepared to go away, leaving the room unprotected. Greed
and fear pulled at him in two opposite directions, as the night came to
an end.
The noise could now be heard in the daytime too. He stopped the
servant from coming into the room, and had his dinner outside. Then he
went back into the room and locked the door. With Durga’s name on his
lips, he removed the bedding from the mouth of the hole. A gurgling of
water and the clinking of something metallic could be heard clearly. As
he nervously hung his head down into the hole he saw that water flowed
over the floor of the low underground room: it was too dark to see much
else. Jabbing a stick down into the water he found it was not more than
knee-deep. Clutching matches and a lamp, he lightly jumped down into
the shallow room. He so feared the extinction of all his hopes that his
hands trembled as he tried to light the lamp. He wasted many matches
before it was lit.
The lamp revealed a huge copper jar attached to a thick, heavy chain;
whenever the water surged, the chain knocked against the jar and made
a clinking noise. Splashing through the water, Baidyanath quickly
reached the jar. It was empty. He could not believe his eyes: he picked
up the jar and shook it violently. There was nothing inside. He turned it
upside down. Nothing fell out. He noticed that the neck of the jar was
broken. It appeared that it had at one time been completely sealed, but
someone had broken into it. He started to thrash around in the water
with his hands, like a madman. He felt an object in the mud – he lifted it
up and found it was a skull. This too he lifted up to his ears and shook –
there was nothing inside it. He hurled it away. He searched everywhere,
but all he found were a few human bones. He saw that part of the wall
which backed on to the river was broken: water was coming in there,
and someone whose horoscope had also predicted the discovery of
hidden treasure had possibly come in through that hole.

In utter despair, Baidyanath gave a long, heart-rending groan – ‘Mā-āā!’ – and the echo seemed to include the groans of many disappointed
people from ages past, groans rising from deep underground with
gloomy resonance. Then, covered with mud, he climbed out of the
underground room.
The crowded world outside seemed a complete lie, as empty as that
broken chained jar. He couldn’t bear the thought of having to pack up
his things, buy a ticket, get on to the train, return home, quarrel with his
wife, carry on with his daily existence. He just wanted to slide and
slump into the water, like the crumbling river-bank.
He did, even so, pack up his things, buy his ticket and climb on to the
train. And one winter evening he arrived back at his house. On autumn
mornings in Āśvin, Baidyanath had sat by his door and watched many
people returning home, and had often sighed with envy at their joy at
returning from afar: he never dreamed he would one day suffer an
evening like this. He entered the house and sat on a wooden seat in the
yard as if in a trance: he did not go indoors. The maid was the first to
see him, and broke into shrieks of delight; the children then came
running, and finally Mokshada sent someone to fetch him. Baidyanath
felt as if he was coming out of a trance, waking up in his former,
familiar world. With a pale face and weak smile he lifted up one of the
boys, and taking the hand of the other went indoors. Lamps were alight,
and though it was not yet fully dark the winter evening was as still as
night. For a while Baidyanath said nothing; then he gently asked his
wife, ‘How are you?’
His wife did not reply, but asked, ‘What happened?’
Baidyanath struck his brow with his palm, and said nothing.
Mokshada’s expression was grim. The children, sensing that something
was very badly wrong, softly withdrew. They went to the maid and said,
‘Tell us that story about the barber.’ Then they went to bed.
Darkness fell, but no word passed between Baidyanath and his wife.
An eerie silence reigned, and Mokshada’s lips were tight shut, ominous
as thunder. At last, still without a word, she slowly went into her
bedroom and locked the door from inside. Baidyanath waited silently
outside. The night-watchman called out the hours. The world sank

exhausted into untroubled sleep. From his family all the way up to the
stars in the sky, no one had anything to ask the sleepless, disgraced
Baidyanath.
Very late at night, his eldest son, probably waking from a dream, got
up, tiptoed out on to the verandah and called, ‘Father.’ His father was
not there. Raising his voice, going right outside the closed doors, he
called, ‘Father.’ But no answer came. Fearfully, he went back to bed.
In the morning, the maid prepared Baidyanath’s tobacco as she had
always done before, but she couldn’t find him anywhere. Later in the
day, neighbours came to visit their recently returned friend, but he was
not there.

Holiday
Phatik Chakrabarti, leader of the gang, suddenly had a bright idea. Lying
by the river was a huge sāl-tree log, just waiting to be made into a mast.
Everyone must help to roll it along! Without giving a thought to the
surprise, annoyance and inconvenience that would be caused to the
person who needed the log for timber, all the boys fell in with this
suggestion. They got down to the task with a will; but just then Phatik’s
younger brother Makhanlal came and solemnly sat on the log. The boys
were rather nonplussed by his haughty, dismissive attitude.
One of them went up to him and nervously tried to push him off, but
he refused to budge. Wise beyond his years, he continued to ponder the
vanity of all childish games.
‘You’ll pay for this,’ said Phatik, brandishing his fist. ‘Clear off.’
But Makhanlal merely adjusted his perch and settled down even more
immovably on the log.
In this kind of situation, Phatik ought to have preserved his
supremacy over the other boys by delivering immediately a hearty slap
on his wayward brother’s cheek – but he didn’t dare. Instead he assumed
a manner implying that he could, had he so wished, have meted out this
customary punishment, but he wasn’t going to, because a more amusing
idea had occurred to him. Why not, he proposed, roll the log over with
Makhanlal on it?
Makhan at first saw glory in this; he did not think (nor did anyone
else) that like other worldly glories it might carry dangers. The boys
rolled up their sleeves and began to push – ‘Heave ho! Heave ho! Over
we go!’ With one spin of the log, Makhan’s solemnity, glory and wisdom
crashed to the ground.
The other boys were delighted at such an unexpectedly quick
outcome, but Phatik was rather embarrassed. Makhan immediately
jumped up and threw himself on to him, hitting him with blind rage and
scratching his nose and cheeks. Then he made his way home tearfully.
The game having been spoilt, Phatik pulled up a few reeds, and

climbing on to the prow of a half-sunk boat sat quietly chewing them. A
boat – not a local one – came up to the mooring-place. A middle-aged
gentleman with a black moustache but grey hair stepped ashore. ‘Where
is the Chakrabartis’ house?’ he asked the boy.
‘Over there,’ replied Phatik, still chewing the reed-stalks. But no one
would have been able to understand which direction to take.
‘Where?’ asked the gentleman again.
‘Don’t know,’ said Phatik, and he carried on as before, sucking juice
from the stalks. The gentleman had to ask others to help him find the
house.
Suddenly Bagha Bagdi (a servant) appeared and said, ‘Phatikdādā,
Mother’s calling you.’
‘Shan’t go,’ said Phatik.
He struggled and kicked helplessly as Bagha picked him up bodily and
carried him home. His mother shouted furiously when she saw him:
‘You’ve beaten up Makhan again!’
‘I didn’t beat him up.’
‘How dare you lie to me?’
‘I did not beat him up. Ask him.’
When Makhan was questioned he stuck to his earlier accusation,
saying, ‘He did beat me up.’ Phatik could not stand this any more. He
charged at Makhan and thumped him hard, shouting, ‘So who’s lying
now?’ His mother, taking Makhan’s part, rushed and slapped Phatik’s
back several times heavily. He pushed her away. ‘So you’d lay hands on
your own mother?’ she screamed.
At that moment the black-grey gentleman entered the house and said,
‘What’s going on here?’
‘Dādā!’ said Phatik’s mother, overwhelmed with surprise and joy.
‘When did you come?’ She bent down and took the dust of his feet.
Many years previously her elder brother had gone to the west of India
to work, and in the meantime she had had two children; they had
grown, her husband had died – but all this time she had never seen her
brother. At long last Bishvambhar Babu had returned home, and had
now come to see his sister.

There were celebrations for several days. At length, a couple of days
before his departure, Bishvambhar questioned his sister about the
schooling and progress of her two sons. In reply, he was given a
description of Phatik’s uncontrollable wildness and inattention to study;
while Makhan, by contrast, was perfectly behaved and a model student.
‘Phatik drives me mad,’ she said.
Bishvambhar then proposed that he take Phatik to Calcutta, keep him
with him and supervise his education. The widow easily agreed to this.
‘Well, Phatik,’ he asked the boy, ‘how would you like to go to Calcutta
with your uncle?’ ‘I’d love to,’ said Phatik, jumping up and down.
His mother did not object to seeing her son off, because she always
lived in dread that Makhan might be pushed into the river by him or
might split his head open in some terrible accident; but she was a little
cast down by the eagerness with which Phatik seized the idea of going.
He pestered his uncle with ‘When are we going? When are we going?’ –
and couldn’t sleep at night for excitement.
When at last the day to leave came, he was moved to a joyous display
of generosity. He bestowed on Makhan his fishing-rod, kite and reel,
with permanent right of inheritance.
When he arrived at his uncle’s house in Calcutta, he first had to be
introduced to his aunt. I cannot say she was over-pleased at this
unnecessary addition to her family. She was used to looking after her
house and three children as they were, and suddenly to loose into their
midst an unknown, uneducated country boy would probably be most
disruptive. If only Bishvambhar had insight commensurate with his
years! Moreover, there is no greater nuisance in the world than a boy of
thirteen or fourteen. There is no beauty in him, and he does nothing
useful either. He arouses no affection; nor is his company welcome. If he
speaks modestly he sounds false; if he speaks sense he sounds arrogant;
if he speaks at all he is felt to be intrusive. He suddenly shoots up in
height so that his clothes no longer fit him – which is an ugly affront to
other people. His childish grace and sweetness of voice suddenly
disappear, and people find it impossible not to blame him for this. Many
faults can be forgiven in a child or a young man, but at this age even
natural and unavoidable faults are felt to be unbearable.

He himself is fully aware that he does not fit properly into the world;
so he is perpetually ashamed of his existence and seeks forgiveness for it.
Yet this is the age at which a rather greater longing for affection
develops in him. If he gets at this time love and companionship from
some sympathetic person, he will do anything in return. But no one
dares show affection, in case others condemn this as pampering. So he
looks and behaves like a stray street-dog.
To leave home and mother and go to a strange place is hell for a boy
of this age. To live with loveless indifference all around is like walking
on thorns. This is the age when normally a conception forms of women
as wonderful, heavenly creatures; to be cold-shouldered by them is
terribly hard to bear. It was therefore especially painful to Phatik that
his aunt saw him as an evil star. If she happened to ask him to do a job
for her and – meaning well – he did more than was strictly necessary, his
aunt would stamp on his enthusiasm, saying, ‘That’s quite enough, quite
enough. I don’t want you meddling any more. Go and get on with your
own work. Do some studying.’ His aunt’s excessive concern for his
mental improvement would then seem terribly cruel and unjust.
He so lacked love in this household, and it seemed he could breathe
freely nowhere. Stuck behind its walls, he thought constantly of his
home village. The fields where he would let his ‘monster-kite’ fly and
flap in the wind; the river-bank where he wandered aimlessly, singing a
rāga of his own invention at the top of his voice; the small stream in
which he would jump and swim now and then in the heat of the day; his
gang of followers; the mischief they would get up to; the freedom; above
all his harsh, impetuous mother; all this tugged continually at his
helpless heart. A kind of instinctive love, like an animal’s; a blind
longing to be near; an unspoken distress at being far; a heartfelt,
anguished cry of ‘Mā, Mā’ like a motherless calf at dusk; such feelings
perpetually afflicted this gawky, nervous, thin, lanky, ungainly boy.
At school there was no one more stupid and inattentive than he. If
asked a question he would just stare back vacantly. If the teacher cuffed
him, he would silently bear it like a laden, exhausted ass. At break-time,
he would stand at the window staring at the roofs of distant houses,
while his classmates played outside. If a child or two appeared for a
moment on one of the roofs, in the midday sunshine, playing some

game, his misery intensified.
One day he plucked up courage to ask his uncle, ‘Uncle, when will I
be going home to see Mother?’
‘When the school holiday comes,’ said his uncle. The pūjā-holiday in
the month of Kartik – that was a long way off!
One day Phatik lost his school-books. He never found it easy to
prepare his lessons, and now, with his books lost, he was completely
helpless. The teacher started to beat and humiliate him every day. His
standing in school sank so low that his cousins were ashamed to admit
their connection with him. Whenever he was punished, they showed
even greater glee than the other boys. It became too much to bear, and
one day he went to his aunt and confessed like a criminal that he had
lost his school-books. ‘Well, well,’ said his aunt, lines of annoyance
curling round her lips, ‘and do you suppose I can buy you new books
five times a month?’ He said no more. That he should have wasted
someone else’s money made him feel even more hurt and rejected by his
mother. His misery and sense of inferiority dragged him down to the
very earth.
That night, when he returned from school, he had a pain in his head
and was shivering. He could tell he was getting a fever. He also knew
that his aunt would not take kindly to his being ill. He had a clear sense
of what an unnecessary, unjustifiable nuisance it would be to her. He felt
he had no right to expect that an odd, useless, stupid boy such as he
should be nursed by anyone other than his mother.
The next morning Phatik was nowhere to be seen. He was searched
for in all the neighbours’ houses round about, but there was no trace of
him. In the evening torrential rain began, so in searching for him many
people got soaked to the skin – to no avail. In the end, finding him
nowhere, Bishvambhar Babu informed the police.
A whole day later, in the evening, a carriage drew up outside
Bishvambhar’s house. Rain was still thudding down relentlessly, and the
street was flooded to a knee’s depth. Two policemen bundled Phatik out
of the carriage and put him down in front of Bishvambhar. He was
soaked from head to foot, covered with mud, his eyes and cheeks were
flushed, he was trembling violently. Bishvambhar virtually had to carry
him into the house.

‘You see what happens,’ snapped his wife, ‘when you take in someone
else’s child. You must send him home.’ But in fact the whole of that day
she had hardly been able to eat for worry, and had been unreasonably
tetchy with her own children.
‘I was going to go to my mother,’ said Phatik, weeping, ‘but they
brought me back.’
The boy’s fever climbed alarmingly. He was delirious all night.
Bishvambhar fetched the doctor. Opening his bloodshot eyes for a
moment and staring blankly at the ceiling joists, Phatik said, ‘Uncle, has
my holiday-time come?’ Bishvambhar, dabbing his own eyes with a
handkerchief, tenderly took Phatik’s thin, hot hand in his and sat down
beside him. He spoke again, mumbling incoherently: ‘Mother, don’t beat
me, Mother. I didn’t do anything wrong, honest!’
The next day, during the short time when he was conscious, Phatik
kept looking bewilderedly round the room, as if expecting someone.
When no one came, he turned and lay mutely with his face towards the
wall. Understanding what was on his mind, Bishvambhar bent down and
said softly in his ear, ‘Phatik, I’ve sent for your mother.’
Another day passed. The doctor, looking solemn and gloomy,
pronounced the boy’s condition to be critical. Bishvambhar sat at the
bedside in the dim lamplight, waiting minute by minute for Phatik’s
mother’s arrival. Phatik started to shout out, like a boatman, ‘More than
one fathom deep, more than two fathoms deep!’ To come to Calcutta
they had had to travel some of the way by steamer. The boatmen had
lowered the hawser into the stream and bellowed out its depth. In his
delirium, Phatik was imitating them, calling out the depth in pathetic
tones; except that the endless sea he was about to cross had no bottom
that his measuring-rope could touch.
It was then that his mother stormed into the room, bursting into loud
wails of grief. When, with difficulty, Bishvambhar managed to calm her
down, she threw herself on to the bed and sobbed, ‘Phatik, my darling,
my treasure.’
‘Yes?’ said Phatik, seemingly quite relaxed.
‘Phatik, darling boy,’ cried his mother again.
Turning slowly on to his side, and looking at no one, Phatik said

softly, ‘Mother, my holiday has come now. I’m going home.’

Kabuliwallah
My five-year-old daughter Mini can’t stop talking for a minute. It only
took her a year to learn to speak, after coming into the world, and ever
since she has not wasted a minute of her waking hours by keeping silent.
Her mother often scolds her and makes her shut up, but I can’t do that.
When Mini is quiet, it is so unnatural that I cannot bear it. So she’s
rather keen on chatting to me.
One morning, as I was starting the seventeenth chapter of my novel,
Mini came up to me and said, ‘Father, Ramdoyal the gatekeeper calls a
crow a kauyā instead of a kāk. He doesn’t know anything, does he!’
Before I had a chance to enlighten her about the multiplicity of
languages in the world, she brought up another subject. ‘Guess what,
Father, Bhola says it rains when an elephant in the sky squirts water
through its trunk. What nonsense he talks! On and on, all day.’
Without waiting for my opinion on this matter either, she suddenly
asked, ‘Father, what relation is Mother to you?’
‘Good question,’1 I said to myself, but to Mini I said, ‘Run off and play
with Bhola. I’ve got work to do.’
But she then sat down near my feet beside my writing-table, and,
slapping her knees, began to recite ‘āgḍum bāgḍum’ at top speed.
Meanwhile, in my seventeenth chapter, Pratap Singh was leaping under
cover of night from his high prison-window into the river below, with
Kanchanmala in his arms.
My study looks out on to the road. Mini suddenly abandoned the
‘āgḍum bāgḍum’ game, ran over to the window and shouted,
‘Kabuliwallah, Kabuliwallah!’
Dressed in dirty baggy clothes, pugree on his head, bag hanging from
his shoulder, and with three or four boxes of grapes in his hands, a tall
Kabuliwallah was ambling along the road. It was hard to say exactly
what thoughts the sight of him had put into my beloved daughter’s
mind, but she began to shout and shriek at him. That swinging bag spells
trouble, I thought: my seventeenth chapter won’t get finished today. But

just as the Kabuliwallah, attracted by Mini’s yells, looked towards us
with a smile and started to approach our house, Mini gasped and ran
into the inner rooms, disappearing from view. She had a blind
conviction that if one looked inside that swinging bag one would find
three or four live children like her.
Meanwhile the Kabuliwallah came up to the window and smilingly
salaamed. I decided that although the plight of Pratap Singh and
Kanchanmala was extremely critical, it would be churlish not to invite
the fellow inside and buy something from him.
I bought something. Then I chatted to him for a bit. We talked about
Abdur Rahman’s efforts to preserve the integrity of Afghanistan against
the Russians and the British. When he got up to leave, he asked, ‘Babu,
where did your little girl go?’
To dispel her groundless fears, I called Mini to come out. She clung to
me and looked suspiciously at the Kabuliwallah and his bag. The
Kabuliwallah took some raisins and apricots out and offered them to her,
but she would not take them, and clung to my knees with doubled
suspicion. Thus passed her first meeting with the Kabuliwallah.
A few days later when for some reason I was on my way out of the house
one morning, I saw my daughter sitting on a bench in front of the door,
nattering unrestrainedly; and the Kabuliwallah was sitting at her feet
listening – grinning broadly, and from time to time making comments in
his hybrid sort of Bengali. In all her five years of life, Mini had never
found so patient a listener, apart from her father. I also saw that the fold
of her little sari was crammed with raisins and nuts. I said to the
Kabuliwallah, ‘Why have you given all these? Don’t give her any more.’ I
then took a half-rupee out of my pocket and gave it to him. He
unhesitatingly took the coin and put it in his bag.
When I returned home, I found that this half-rupee had caused a fullscale row. Mini’s mother was holding up a round shining object and
saying crossly to Mini, ‘Where did you get this half-rupee from?’
‘The Kabuliwallah gave it to me,’ said Mini.
‘Why did you take it from the Kabuliwallah?’ said her mother.
‘I didn’t ask for it,’ said Mini tearfully. ‘He gave it to me himself.’

I rescued Mini from her mother’s wrath, and took her outside. I learnt
that this was not just the second time that Mini and the Kabuliwallah
had met: he had been coming nearly every day and, by bribing her eager
little heart with pistachio-nuts, had quite won her over. I found that they
now had certain fixed jokes and routines: for example as soon as Mini
saw Rahamat, she giggled and asked, ‘Kabuliwallah, O Kabuliwallah,
what have you got in your bag?’ Rahamat would laugh back and say –
giving the word a peculiar nasal twang – ‘An elephant.’ The notion of an
elephant in his bag was the source of immense hilarity; it might not be a
very subtle joke, but they both seemed to find it very funny, and it gave
me pleasure to see, on an autumn morning, a young child and a grown
man laughing so heartily.
They had a couple of other jokes. Rahamat would say to Mini, ‘Little
one, don’t ever go off to your śvaśurbāri.’ Most Bengali girls grow up
hearing frequent references to their svaśur-bāri, but my wife and I are
rather progressive people and we don’t keep talking to our young
daughter about her future marriage. She therefore couldn’t clearly
understand what Rahamat meant; yet to remain silent and give no reply
was wholly against her nature, so she would turn the idea round and
say, ‘Are you going to your śvaśurbāri?’ Shaking his huge fist at an
imaginary father-in-law Rahamat said, ‘I’ll settle him!’ Mini laughed
merrily as she imagined the fate awaiting this unknown creature called a
śvaśur.
It was perfect autumn weather. In ancient times, kings used to set out on
their world-conquests in autumn. I have never been away from Calcutta;
precisely because of that, my mind roves all over the world. I seem to be
condemned to my house, but I constantly yearn for the world outside. If
I hear the name of a foreign land, at once my heart races towards it; and
if I see a foreigner, at once an image of a cottage on some far bank or
wooded mountainside forms in my mind, and I think of the free and
pleasant life I would lead there. At the same time, I am such a rooted
sort of individual that whenever I have to leave my familiar spot I
practically collapse. So a morning spent sitting at my table in my little
study, chatting with this Kabuliwallah, was quite enough wandering for
me. High, scorched, blood-coloured, forbidding mountains on either side

of a narrow desert path; laden camels passing; turbaned merchants and
wayfarers, some on camels, some walking, some with spears in their
hands, some with old-fashioned flintlock guns: my friend would talk of
his native land in his booming, broken Bengali, and a mental picture of
it would pass before my eyes.
Mini’s mother is very easily alarmed. The slightest noise in the street
makes her think that all the world’s drunkards are charging straight at
our house. She cannot dispel from her mind – despite her experience of
life (which isn’t great) – the apprehension that the world is overrun with
thieves, bandits, drunkards, snakes, tigers, malaria, caterpillars,
cockroaches and white-skinned marauders. She was not too happy about
Rahamat the Kabuliwallah. She repeatedly told me to keep a close eye
on him. If I tried to laugh off her suspicions, she would launch into a
succession of questions: ‘So do people’s children never go missing? And
is there no slavery in Afghanistan? Is it completely impossible for a huge
Afghan to kidnap a little child?’ I had to admit that it was not
impossible, but I found it hard to believe. People are suggestible to
varying degrees; this was why my wife remained so edgy. But I still saw
nothing wrong in letting Rahamat come to our house.
Every year, about the middle of the month of Māgh, Rahamat went
home. He was always very busy before he left, collecting money owed to
him. He had to go from house to house; but he still made time to visit
Mini. To see them together, one might well suppose that they were
plotting something. If he couldn’t come in the morning he would come
in the evening; to see his lanky figure in a corner of the darkened house,
with his baggy pyjamas hanging loosely around him, was indeed a little
frightening. But my heart would light up as Mini ran to meet him,
smiling and calling, ‘O Kabuliwallah, Kabuliwallah,’ and the usual
innocent jokes passed between the two friends, unequal in age though
they were.
One morning I was sitting in my little study correcting proof-sheets.
The last days of winter had been very cold, shiveringly so. The morning
sun was shining through the window on to my feet below my table, and
this touch of warmth was very pleasant. It must have been about eight
o’clock – early morning walkers, swathed in scarves, had mostly finished

their dawn stroll and had returned to their homes. It was then that there
was a sudden commotion in the street.
I looked out and saw our Rahamat in handcuffs, being marched along
by two policemen, and behind him a crowd of curious boys. Rahamat’s
clothes were blood-stained, and one of the policemen was holding a
blood-soaked knife. I went outside and stopped him, asking what was
up. I heard partly from him and partly from Rahamat himself that a
neighbour of ours had owed Rahamat something for a Rampuri chadar;
he had tried to lie his way out of the debt, and in the ensuing brawl
Rahamat had stabbed him.
Rahamat was mouthing various unrepeatable curses against the lying
debtor, when Mini ran out of the house calling, ‘Kabuliwallah, O
Kabuliwallah.’ For a moment Rahamat’s face lit up with pleasure. He
had no bag over his shoulder today, so they couldn’t have their usual
discussion about it. Mini came straight out with her ‘Are you going to
your śvaśur-bāṛi?’
‘Yes, I’m going there now,’ said Rahamat with a smile. But when he
saw that his reply had failed to amuse Mini, he brandished his
handcuffed fists and said, ‘I would have killed my śvaśur, but how can I
with these on?’
Rahamat was convicted of assault, and sent to prison for several years.
He virtually faded from our minds. Living at home, carrying on day by
day with our routine tasks, we gave no thought to how a free-spirited
mountain-dweller was passing his years behind prison-walls. As for the
fickle Mini, even her father would have to admit that her behaviour was
not very praiseworthy. She swiftly forgot her old friend. At first Nabi the
groom replaced him in her affections; later, as she grew up, girls rather
than little boys became her favourite companions. She even stopped
coming to her father’s study. And I, in a sense, dropped her.
Several years went by. It was autumn again. Mini’s marriage had been
decided, and the wedding was fixed for the pūjā-holiday. Our pride and
joy would soon, like Durga going to Mount Kailas, darken her parents’
house by moving to her husband’s.
It was a most beautiful morning. Sunlight, washed clean by monsoon
rains, seemed to shine with the purity of smelted gold. Its radiance lent

an extraordinary grace to Calcutta’s back-streets, with their squalid,
tumbledown, cheek-by-jowl dwellings. The sānāi started to play in our
house when night was scarcely over. Its wailing vibrations seemed to
rise from deep within my ribcage. Its sad Bhairavī rāga joined forces
with the autumn sunshine, in spreading through the world the grief of
my imminent separation. Today my Mini would be married.
From dawn on there was uproar, endless coming and going. A canopy
was being erected in the yard of the house, by binding bamboo-poles
together; chandeliers tinkled as they were hung in the rooms and
verandahs; there was constant loud talk.
I was sitting in my study doing accounts, when Rahamat suddenly
appeared and salaamed before me. At first I didn’t recognize him. He
had no bag; he had lost his long hair; his former vigour had gone. But
when he smiled, I recognized him.
‘How are you, Rahamat?’ I said. ‘When did you come?’
‘I was let out of prison yesterday evening,’ he replied.
His words startled me. I had never confronted a would-be murderer
before; I shrank back at the sight of him. I began to feel that on this
auspicious morning it would be better to have the man out of the way.
‘We’ve got something on in our house today,’ I said. ‘I’m rather busy.
Please go now.’
He was ready to go at once, but just as he reached the door he
hesitated a little and said, ‘Can’t I see your little girl for a moment?’
It seemed he thought that Mini was still just as she was when he had
known her: that she would come running as before, calling
‘Kabuliwallah, O Kabuliwallah!’; that their old merry banter would
resume. He had even brought (remembering their old friendship) a box
of grapes and a few nuts and raisins wrapped in paper – extracted, no
doubt, from some Afghan friend of his, having no bag of his own now.
‘There’s something on in the house today,’ I said. ‘You can’t see
anyone.’
He looked rather crestfallen. He stood silently for a moment longer,
casting a solemn glance at me; then, saying ‘Babu salaam’, he walked
towards the door. I felt a sudden pang. I thought of calling him back, but
then I saw that he himself was returning.

‘I brought this box of grapes and these nuts and raisins for the little
one,’ he said. ‘Please give them to her.’ Taking them from him, I was
about to pay him for them when he suddenly clasped my arm and said,
‘Please, don’t give me any money – I shall always be grateful, Babu. Just
as you have a daughter, so do I have one, in my own country. It is with
her in mind that I came with a few raisins for your daughter: I didn’t
come to trade with you.’
Then he put a hand inside his big loose shirt and took out from
somewhere close to his heart a crumpled piece of paper. Unfolding it
very carefully, he spread it out on my table. There was a small handprint
on the paper: not a photograph, not a painting – the hand had been
rubbed with some soot and pressed down on to the paper. Every year
Rahamat carried this memento of his daughter in his breast-pocket when
he came to sell raisins in Calcutta’s streets: as if the touch of that soft,
small, childish hand brought solace to his huge, homesick breast. My
eyes swam at the sight of it. I forgot then that he was an Afghan raisinseller and I was a Bengali Babu. I understood then that he was as I am,
that he was a father just as I am a father. The handprint of his little
mountain-dwelling Parvati reminded me of my own Mini.
At once I sent for her from the inner part of the house. Objections
came back: I refused to listen to them. Mini, dressed as a bride – sandalpaste pattern on her brow, red silk sari – came timidly into the room and
stood close by me.
The Kabuliwallah was confused at first when he saw her: he couldn’t
bring himself to utter his old greeting. But at last he smiled and said,
‘Little one, are you going to your śvasur-bāṛi?’
Mini now knew the meaning of śvaśur-bāṛi; she couldn’t reply as
before – she blushed at Rahamat’s question and looked away. I recalled
the day when Mini and the Kabuliwallah had first met. My heart ached.
Mini left the room, and Rahamat, sighing deeply, sat down on the
floor. He suddenly understood clearly that his own daughter would have
grown up too since he last saw her, and with her too he would have to
become re-acquainted: he would not find her exactly as she was before.
Who knew what had happened to her these eight years? In the cool
autumn morning sunshine the sānāi went on playing, and Rahamat sat in
a Calcutta lane and pictured to himself the barren mountains of

Afghanistan.
I took out a banknote and gave it to him. ‘Rahamat,’ I said, ‘go back to
your homeland and your daughter; by your blessed reunion, Mini will be
blessed.’
By giving him this money, I had to trim certain items from the
wedding-festivities. I wasn’t able to afford the electric illuminations I
had planned, nor did the trumpet-and-drum band come. The womenfolk
were very displeased at this; but for me, the ceremony was lit by a
kinder, more gracious light.

The Editor
While my wife was alive I didn’t give much thought to Prabha. I was
more involved with her mother than with her. I was happy to watch her
play and laugh, to listen to her half-formed speech and respond to her
affection; I would, whenever I was in the mood, romp around with her;
but the moment she started to cry I would return her to her mother’s
arms and make a speedy escape. I never considered what care and effort
were needed to bring up a child.
But with the sudden and untimely death of my wife, Prabha’s
upbringing passed to me, and I clasped her warmly. I don’t quite know
whose concern was the stronger: mine to bring up my motherless
daughter with double affection, or hers to look after her wifeless father.
But from the age of six, she took charge of the house. It was plain to see
that this little girl was trying to be her father’s sole guardian.
It tickled me to put myself entirely into her hands. I noticed that the
more useless and helpless I was, the more she liked it; if I picked up my
clothes or umbrella myself, she reacted as if I had infringed her rights.
She had never before had a doll as big as her father; she revelled all day
in feeding him, dressing him, settling him down to sleep. Only when I
took her through her arithmetic book or the first part of her poetry
reader did my paternal responsibility come slightly alive.
From time to time I remembered that to marry her to a suitable groom
would cost a lot of money – but where was I to get that money? I was
educating her as well as I could: it would be awful if she ended up in
some nincompoop’s hands.
I gave my attention to the need to earn money. I was too old to get a
job in a government office, and there was no way I could get into any
other office either. After much pondering, I started to write books.
If you punch holes in a hollow bamboo stick, it doesn’t become a
receptacle; you can’t keep oil or water in it; it can’t be put to any
practical use. But if you blow into it, it makes an excellent cost-free
flute. I had the idea that anyone who was unfortunate enough to be

useless at any practical work would certainly write good books.
Confident of this, I wrote a satirical farce. People said it was good, and it
was performed on stage.
The dangerous result of my sudden taste of fame was that I now
couldn’t stop writing farces. With knotted brow, I spent all day writing
them.
Prabha would come and ask, with a loving smile, ‘Won’t you have
your bath, Father?’
‘Leave me alone,’ I snapped. ‘Don’t bother me now.’
Probably the girl’s face darkened like a lamp suddenly blown out; but
I never even noticed her silent, pained withdrawal from the room.
I flared up at the maid, and cuffed the male servant; if a beggar came
calling for alms I would drive him away with a stick. If an innocent
passer-by spoke through my window to ask the way (my room looked on
to the street), I would tell him to go to hell. Why couldn’t people
understand that I was, at that moment, writing a hilarious farce?
But the money I earned was not at all proportionate either to the
hilarity of my farces or to my fame. Nor, at the time, was the money
uppermost in my mind. Meanwhile, in unthought-of places, grooms
suitable for Prabha were growing up who would set other fathers free
from their duty to their daughters, and I failed to notice. Probably only
starvation would have brought me to my senses; but now a new
opportunity came my way. The zamindar of Jahir village invited me to
be the salaried editor of a paper he was starting. I accepted, and within a
few days I was writing with such fervour that people used to point me
out in the street, and in my own estimation I was as blindingly brilliant
as the afternoon sun. Next to Jahir was Ahir village. The zamindars of
the two villages were bitter enemies. Previously their quarrels had led to
brawls – but now the magistrate had bound them over to keep the peace,
and the zamindar of Jahir had engaged poor me in place of his
murderous lāṭhiyāls.
Everyone told me I discharged my duties most honourably. The Ahir
villagers were utterly cowed by my pen. The whole of their history and
ancestry was blackened by it.
This was a good time for me. I became quite fat. There was a

perpetual smile on my face. I fired devastating verbal sallies at the
people of Ahir and their ancestors, and everyone in Jahir split their sides
at my wit. I was blissfully happy.
In the end, Ahir village also brought out a paper. They didn’t mince
their words. They hurled insults with such zeal and in such crude and
vulgar language that the very letters on the page seemed to shriek before
one’s eyes. The people of both villages knew exactly what was intended.
But I, as was my custom, attacked my opponents with humour, subtlety
and irony, so that neither my friends nor my enemies could understand
what I meant. The result was that though I had won the argument
everyone thought I had lost. I then felt compelled to write a sermon on
good taste – but I found that this too was a grave mistake, for whereas it
is easy to ridicule what is good, it is not so easy to ridicule what is
already ridiculous. The sons of Hanu can happily make fun of the sons of
Manu, but the sons of Manu can never be so successful at pillorying the
sons of Hanu: whose snarls, therefore, drove good taste out of town.
My employer cooled towards me. I was not welcome at public
gatherings. When I went out, no one hailed me or spoke to me. People
even began to laugh when they saw me. My farces, meanwhile, were
completely forgotten. I felt like a spent match; I had flamed for a minute,
and then burned out. I was so disheartened that however hard I
scratched my head, not a line of writing would come. I began to feel
there was no point in living any more.
Prabha was now scared of me. She did not dare approach unless she
was invited. She had come to see that a clay doll was a much better
companion than a father who wrote satires.
One day it became apparent that the Ahir paper had started to
concentrate on me rather than on the zamindar. Vile things were
written. My friends each brought me the paper and read it out with great
amusement. Some of them said that whatever the content, the language
was superb: by which they meant that the slanders it contained were
easy to understand. I heard this same opinion throughout the day.
There was a small plot of garden in front of my house. One evening I
was pacing there alone, utterly sick at heart. As the birds returned to
their nests and stopped their singing, freely consigning themselves to the
peace of the evening, I was taken with the thought that there are no

satirists’ cliques among birds, no arguments about good taste. But I was
still preoccupied with how I could best reply to my slanderers. One of
the drawbacks of refinement is that not every sort of person understands
it. Boorish language is relatively commonplace, so I decided I would
write a reply in appropriately boorish style. I would not give in! At that
moment I heard a small, familiar voice in the darkness of the evening,
and next I felt a tender, hot hand touch mine. I was so worried and
distracted that even though the voice and touch were known to me, they
did not sink in. But a moment later the voice was gently sounding in my
ears, and the delicate touch was intensifying. A little girl was beside me,
and was softly calling, ‘Father.’ When she got no answer she lifted my
right hand and pressed it lightly against her cheek; then she slowly went
indoors.
Prabha had not called me like this for a long time – had not, of her
own accord, come and showed that sort of affection. So her tender touch
this evening went straight to my heart.
A little later I returned to the house and saw Prabha lying on the bed.
She looked worn out, and her eyes were slightly closed; she lay like a
flower, shed at the end of the day. I felt her brow: it was very warm; her
breath was hot too; the veins in her temple were throbbing. I realized
now that the girl, distressed by the onset of illness, had gone to her
father longing with all her heart for his care and affection; and her
father had at the time been engrossed in thinking up a scorching reply
for the Jahir paper to print.
I sat down next to her. Saying nothing, she pulled my hand into the
feverishly warm palms of her hands and, placing her cheek on it, lay
quietly.
I made a bonfire of all the Jahir and Ahir papers. I never wrote my
riposte. And giving up like that gave me greater happiness than I had
ever known.
When her mother died, I held Prabha in my lap. Now, after cremating
her stepmother – my writing – I lifted her into my arms again and
carried her indoors.

Punishment
I
When the brothers Dukhiram Rui and Chidam Rui went out in the
morning with their heavy farm-knives, to work in the fields, their wives
were already quarrelling and shouting. But the people near by were as
used to the uproar as they were to other customary, natural sounds. As
soon as they heard the shrill screams of the women, they would say,
‘They’re at it again’ – that is, what was happening was only to be
expected: it was not a violation of Nature’s rules. When the sun rises at
dawn, no one asks why; and whenever the two wives in this kuri-caste
household let fly at each other, no one was at all curious to investigate
the cause.
Of course this wrangling and disturbance affected the husbands more
than the neighbours, but they did not count it a major nuisance. It was
as if they were riding together along life’s road in a cart whose rattling,
clattering, unsprung wheels were inseparable from the journey. Indeed,
days when there was no noise, when everything was uncannily silent,
carried a greater threat of unpredictable doom.
The day on which our story begins was like this. When the brothers
returned home at dusk, exhausted by their work, they found the house
eerily quiet. Outside, too, it was extremely sultry. There had been a
sharp shower in the afternoon, and clouds were still massing. There was
not a breath of wind. Weeds and scrub round the house had shot up after
the rain: the heavy scent of damp vegetation, from these and from the
waterlogged jute-fields, formed a solid wall all around. Frogs croaked
from the pond behind the cowshed, and the buzz of crickets filled the
leaden sky.
Not far off the swollen Padma looked flat and sinister under the
mounting clouds. It had flooded most of the grain-fields, and had come
close to the houses. Here and there, roots of mango and jackfruit trees
on the slipping bank stuck up out of the water, like helpless hands

clawing at the void for a last fingerhold.
That day, Dukhiram and Chidam had been working at the zamindar’s
office-building. On the sandbanks opposite, paddy had ripened. The
paddy needed to be cut before the sandbanks were washed away; the
poorest villagers were busy there either in their own fields or in other
people’s fields; but a bailiff had come from the office and forcibly
engaged the two brothers. As the office roof was leaking in places, they
had to mend that and make some new wickerwork panels: it had taken
them all day. They couldn’t come home for lunch; they just had a snack
from the office. At times they were soaked by the rain; they were not
paid normal labourers’ wages; indeed, they were paid mainly in insults
and sneers.
When the two brothers returned at dusk, wading through mud and
water, they found the younger wife, Chandara, stretched on the ground
with her sari spread out. Like the sky, she had wept buckets in the
afternoon, but had now given way to sultry exhaustion. The elder wife,
Radha, sat on the verandah sullenly: her eighteen-month son had been
crying, but when the brothers came in they saw him lying naked in a
corner of the yard, asleep.
Dukhiram, famished, said gruffly, ‘Give me my food.’
Like a spark on a sack of gunpowder, the elder wife exploded,
shrieking out, ‘Where is there food? Did you give me anything to cook?
Must I walk the streets to earn it?’
After a whole day of toil and humiliation, to return – raging with
hunger – to a dark, joyless, foodless house, to be met by Radha’s
sarcasm, and especially by that last insinuation, was suddenly
unendurable. ‘What?’ he roared, like a furious tiger, and then, without
thinking, plunged his knife into her head. Radha collapsed into her
sister-in-law’s lap, and in minutes she was dead.
‘What have you done?’ screamed Chandara, her clothes soaked with
blood. Chidam pressed his hand over her mouth. Dukhiram, letting the
knife drop, fell to his knees with his head in his hands, stunned. The
little boy woke up and started to wail in terror.
Outside there was complete quiet. The herd-boys were returning with
the cattle. Those who had been cutting paddy on the opposite side of the

river were crossing back five or six to a boat, with a couple of bundles of
paddy on their heads as payment, and were now nearly all home.
Ramlochan Chakrabarti, pillar of the village, had been to the post office
with a letter, and was now back in his house, placidly smoking.
Suddenly he remembered that his sub-tenant Dukhiram was very behind
with his rent: he had promised to pay some today. Deciding that the
brothers must be home by now, he threw his chadar over his shoulders,
took his umbrella, and stepped out.
As he entered the Ruis’ house, he felt uneasy. There was no lamp
alight. On the dark verandah, the dim shapes of three or four people
could be seen. In a corner of the verandah there were fitful, muffled
sobs: the little boy was trying to cry for his mother, but was stopped
each time by Chidam.
‘Dukhi,’ said Ramlochan nervously, ‘are you there?’
Dukhiram had been sitting like a statue for a long time; now, on
hearing his name, he burst into tears like a helpless child.
Chidam quickly came down from the verandah into the yard, to meet
Ramlochan. ‘Have the women been quarrelling again?’ Ramlochan
asked. ‘I heard them yelling all day.’
Chidam, all this time, had been unable to think what to do. Various
impossible stories occurred to him. All he had decided was that later that
night he would move the body somewhere. He had never expected
Ramlochan to come. He could think of no swift reply. ‘Yes,’ he stumbled,
‘today they were quarrelling terribly.’
‘But why is Dukhi crying so?’ asked Ramlochan, stepping towards the
verandah.
Seeing no way out now, Chidam blurted, ‘In their quarrel, Choṭobau
struck at Baṛobau’s head with a farm-knife.’
When immediate danger threatens, it is hard to think of other
dangers. Chidam’s only thought was of how to escape from the terrible
truth – he forgot that a lie can be even more terrible. A reply to
Ramlochan’s question had come instantly to mind, and he had blurted it
out.
‘Good grief,’ said Ramlochan in horror. ‘What are you saying? Is she

dead?’
‘She’s dead,’ said Chidam, clasping Ramlochan’s feet.
Ramlochan was trapped. ‘Rām, Rām,’ he thought, ‘what a mess I’ve got
into this evening. What if I have to be a witness in court?’ Chidam was
still clinging to his feet, saying, ‘Thākur, how can I save my wife?’
Ramlochan was the village’s chief source of advice on legal matters.
Reflecting further he said, ‘I think I know a way. Run to the police
station: say that your brother Dukhi returned in the evening wanting his
food, and because it wasn’t ready he struck his wife on the head with his
knife. I’m sure that if you say that, she’ll get off.’
Chidam felt a sickening dryness in his throat. He stood up and said,
‘Thākur, if I lose my wife I can get another, but if my brother is hanged,
how can I replace him?’ In laying the blame on his wife, he had not seen
it that way. He had spoken without thought; now, imperceptibly,
arguments that would serve his own interest were forming in his mind.
Ramlochan took the point. ‘Then say what actually happened,’ he
said. ‘You can’t protect yourself on all sides.’
In no time after he had hurried away, the news spread round the
village that Chandara Rui had, in a quarrel with her sister-in-law, split
her head open with a farm-knife. Police charged into the village like a
river in flood. Both the guilty and the innocent were equally afraid.

II
Chidam decided he would have to stick to the path he had chalked out
for himself. The story he had given to Ramlochan Chakrabarti had gone
all round the village; who knew what would happen if another story was
circulated? But he realized that if he kept to the story he would have to
wrap it in five more stories if his wife was to be saved.
Chidam asked Chandara to take the blame on to herself. She was
dumbfounded. He reassured her: ‘Don’t worry – if you do what I tell you,
you’ll be quite safe.’ But whatever his words, his throat was dry and his
face was pale.
Chandara was not more than seventeen or eighteen. She was buxom,

well-rounded, compact and sturdy – so trim in her movements that in
walking, turning, bending or squatting there was no awkwardness at all.
She was like a brand-new boat: neat and shapely, gliding with ease, not
a loose joint anywhere. Everything amused and intrigued her; she loved
to gossip; her bright, restless, deep black eyes missed nothing as she
walked to the ghāṭ, pitcher on her hip, parting her veil slightly with her
finger.
The elder wife had been her exact opposite: unkempt, sloppy and
slovenly. She was utterly disorganized in her dress, housework, and the
care of her child. She never had any proper work in hand, yet never
seemed to have time for anything. The younger wife usually refrained
from comment, for at the mildest barb Radha would rage and stamp and
let fly at her, disturbing everyone around.
Each wife was matched by her husband to an extraordinary degree.
Dukhiram was a huge man – his bones were immense, his nose was
squat, in his eyes and expression he seemed not to understand the world
very well, yet he never questioned it either. He was innocent yet
fearsome: a rare combination of power and helplessness. Chidam,
however, seemed to have been carefully carved from shiny black rock.
There was not an inch of excess fat on him, not a wrinkle or pock-mark
anywhere. Each limb was a perfect blend of strength and finesse.
Whether jumping from a river-bank, or punting a boat, or climbing up
bamboo-shoots for sticks, he showed complete dexterity, effortless grace.
His long black hair was combed with oil back from his brow and down
to his shoulders – he took great care over his dress and appearance.
Although he was not unresponsive to the beauty of other women in the
village, and was keen to make himself charming in their eyes, his real
love was for his young wife. They quarrelled sometimes, but always
made peace again, for neither could defeat the other. There was a
further reason why the bond between them was firm: Chidam felt that a
wife as nimble and sharp as Chandara could not be wholly trusted, and
Chandara felt that her husband had roving eyes – that if she didn’t keep
him on a tight rein he might go astray.
A little before the events in this story, however, they had a major row.
Chandara found that her husband used work as an excuse for travelling

far and for staying extra days away, yet brought no earnings home.
Finding this ominous, she too began to overstep the mark. She kept
going to the ghāṭ, and returned from wandering round the village with
rather too much to say about Kashi Majumdar’s middle son.
Something now seemed to poison Chidam’s life. He could not settle
his attention on his work. One day he bitterly rebuked his sister-in-law,
laying the blame on her: she threw up her hands and said in the name of
her dead father, ‘That girl runs before the storm. How can I restrain her?
Who knows what ruin she will bring?’
Chandara came out of the next room and said sweetly, ‘What’s the
matter, Didi?’ and a fierce quarrel broke out between them.
Chidam glared at his wife and said, ‘If I ever hear that you’ve been to
the ghāṭ on your own, I’ll break every bone in your body.’
‘That would be a blessed release,’ said Chandara, starting to leave.
Chidam sprang at her, grabbed her by the hair, dragged her back to the
room and locked her in.
When he returned from work that evening he found the doors open,
the house empty. Chandara had fled three villages away, to her maternal
uncle’s house. With great difficulty Chidam persuaded her to return, but
now he had to give in. It was as hard to restrain his wife as to hold a
handful of mercury; she always slipped through his fingers. He did not
use force any more, but there was no peace in the house. Ever-fearful
love for his elusive young wife wracked him with intense pain. He even
once or twice wondered if it would be better if she were dead: at least he
would get some peace then. Human beings can hate each other more
than death.
It was at this time that the crisis hit the house.
When her husband asked her to admit to the murder, Chandara stared at
him, stunned; her black eyes burnt him like fire. Then she slowly shrank
from him, as if to escape his devilish clutches. She turned her heart and
soul quite away. ‘You’ve nothing to fear,’ said Chidam. He taught her
repeatedly what she should say to the police and the magistrate.
Chandara paid no attention – sat like a wooden idol whenever he spoke.
Dukhiram relied on Chidam for everything. When he told him to lay

the blame on Chandara, Dukhiram asked, ‘But what will happen to her?’
‘I’ll save her,’ said Chidam. His burly brother was content with that.

III
This was what Chidam instructed his wife to say: ‘The elder wife was
about to attack me with the vegetable-slicer. I picked up a farm-knife to
stop her, and it somehow cut into her.’ This was all Ramlochan’s
invention. He had generously supplied Chidam with the proofs and
embroidery that the story would require.
The police came to investigate. The villagers were sure now that
Chandara had murdered her sister-in-law, and all the witnesses
confirmed this. When the police questioned Chandara, she said, ‘Yes, I
killed her.’
‘Why did you kill her?’
‘I couldn’t stand her any more.’
‘Was there a brawl between you?’
‘No.’
‘Did she attack you first?’
‘No.’
‘Did she ill-treat you?’
‘No.’
Everyone was amazed at these replies, and Chidam was completely
thrown off balance. ‘She’s not telling the truth,’ he said. ‘The elder wife
first –’
The inspector silenced him sharply. Subjecting Chandara to a
thorough cross-examination, he repeatedly received the same reply:
Chandara would not accept that she had been attacked in any way by
her sister-in-law. Such an obstinate girl was never seen! She seemed
absolutely bent on going to the gallows; nothing would stop her. Such
fierce, disastrous pride!1 In her thoughts, Chandara was saying to her
husband, ‘I shall give my youth to the gallows instead of to you. My final
ties in this life will be with them.’
Chandara was arrested, and left her home for ever, by the paths she

knew so well, past the festival carriage, the market-place, the ghāt, the
Majumdars’ house, the post office, the school – an ordinary, harmless,
flirtatious, fun-loving village wife; carrying a stigma that could never be
obliterated. A bevy of boys followed her, and the women of the village,
her friends and companions – some of them peering through their veils,
some from their doorsteps, some from behind trees – watched the police
leading her away and shuddered with embarrassment, fear and
contempt.
To the Deputy Magistrate, Chandara again confessed her guilt,
claiming no ill-treatment from her sister-in-law at the time of the
murder. But when Chidam was called to the witness-box he broke down
completely, weeping, clasping his hands and saying, ‘I swear to you, sir,
my wife is innocent.’ The magistrate sternly told him to control himself,
and began to question him. Bit by bit the true story came out.
The magistrate did not believe him, because the chief, most
respectable, most educated witness – Ramlochan Chakrabarti – said: ‘I
appeared on the scene a little after the murder. Chidam confessed
everything to me and clung to my feet saying, “Tell me how I can save
my wife.” I did not say anything one way or the other. Then Chidam
said, “If I say that my elder brother killed his wife in a fit of fury because
his food wasn’t ready, will she get off?” I said, “Be careful, you rogue:
don’t say a single false word in court – there’s no worse offence than
that.” ’ Ramlochan had previously prepared lots of stories that would
save Chandara, but when he found that she herself was bending her neck
to receive the noose, he decided, ‘Why the hell should I run the risk of
giving false evidence now? I’d better say what little I know.’ So
Ramlochan said what he knew – or rather said a little more than he
knew.
The Deputy Magistrate committed the case to a sessions trial.
Meanwhile in fields, houses, markets and bazaars, the mirth and grief of
the world carried on; and just as in previous years, torrential monsoon
rains fell on to the new rice-crop.
Police, defendant and witnesses were all in court. In the civil court
opposite hordes of people were waiting for their cases. A Calcutta lawyer
had come on a suit about the sharing of a pond behind a kitchen; the
plaintiff had thirty-nine witnesses. Hundreds of people were anxiously

waiting for hair-splitting judgements, certain that nothing, at present,
was more important. Chidam stared out of the window at the constant
throng, and it seemed like a dream. A koel-bird was hooting from a huge
banyan tree in the compound: no courts or cases in his world!
Chandara said to the judge, ‘Sir, how many times must I go on saying
the same thing?’
The judge explained, ‘Do you know the penalty for the crime you have
confessed?’
‘No,’ said Chandara.
‘It is death by the hanging.’
‘Then please, please give it to me, sir,’ said Chandara. ‘Do what you
like – I can’t take any more.’
When her husband was called to the court, she turned away. ‘Look at
the witness,’ said the judge, ‘and say who he is.’
‘He is my husband,’ said Chandara, covering her face with her hands.
‘Does he not love you?’
‘Like crazy.’
‘Do you not love him?’
‘Madly.’
When Chidam was questioned, he said, ‘I killed her.
‘Why?’
‘I wanted my food and my sister-in-law didn’t give it to me.’
When Dukhiram came to give evidence, he fainted. When he had
come round again, he answered, ‘Sir, I killed her.’
‘Why?’
‘I wanted a meal and she didn’t give it to me.’
After extensive cross-examination of various other witnesses, the
judge concluded that the brothers had confessed to the crime in order to
save the younger wife from the shame of the noose. But Chandara had,
from the police investigation right through to the sessions trial, said the
same thing repeatedly – she had not budged an inch from her story. Two
barristers, of their own volition, did their utmost to save her from the
death-sentence, but in the end were defeated by her.

Who, on that auspicious night when, at a very young age, a dusky,
diminutive, round-faced girl had left her childhood dolls in her father’s
house and come to her in-laws’ house, could have imagined these
events? Her father, on his deathbed, had happily reflected that at least
he had made proper arrangements for his daughter’s future.
In gaol, just before the hanging, a kindly Civil Surgeon asked
Chandara, ‘Do you want to see anyone?’
‘I’d like to see my mother,’ she replied.
‘Shall I call your husband?’ asked the doctor. ‘He wants to see you.’
‘To hell with him,’1 said Chandara.

A Problem Solved
I
Krishnagopal Sarkar of the village of Jhinkrakota handed over the
running of his estate and his other responsibilities to his elder son, and
set off for Benares. His humble tenants wept bitterly at losing him: so
liberal and pious a landlord was rare indeed in the age of Kali.
His son Bipinbihari was a modern, sophisticated BA. He had a beard,
wore glasses, and did not mix much with others. He was highly virtuous:
he never even smoked or played cards. His manner was courteous and
affable – but in fact he was a very hard man, and his tenants quickly felt
the effect of this. The old landlord had been lenient with them; but with
his son there was no hope of a paisa’s exemption from debt or rent, on
whatever grounds. They had to pay on the nail, without a single day’s
leeway.
When Bipinbihari took over, he found that his father had frequently
released land to Brahmins free of rent, and many people had had their
rent reduced. If anyone came with a plea of some kind, he was never
able to refuse it: this was his weakness.
‘It won’t do,’ said Bipinbihari. ‘I can’t let half the estate go rent-free.’
He reached two separate conclusions. Firstly, workshy people who sat at
home growing fat on rent from land they had sublet were in most cases
useless and deserved no pity. Charity to the likes of them simply gave
refuge to idlers. Secondly, it was much harder to ensure an income than
in his father and grandfather’s time. There was much more scarcity. It
cost four times as much to preserve a gentleman’s dignity as it had in the
past. His father’s open-handed, happy-go-lucky scattering of assets would
not do now; on the contrary, they should now be retrieved and
expanded. Bipinbihari began to do what his conscience told him – that
is, he began to act according to ‘principle’.1 Whatever had gone out of
the house, bit by bit came in again. He allowed very few of the rent-free
tenancies to continue, ensuring that even these would not be permanent.

In Benares, Krishnagopal heard, through letters, of his tenants’
distress: some of them actually went and appealed to him personally. He
wrote to Bipinbihari saying that what he was doing was deplorable.
Bipinbihari replied that formerly when gifts had been made various
things were received in return. There had been a reciprocal relationship
between zamindar and tenants. Recently laws had been passed that
banned anything being given in return other than straightforward rent: a
zamindar’s rights and privileges, other than rent, had been abolished. So
what else could he do but keep a close eye on his dues? If the tenants
gave him nothing extra, why should he give extra to them? The
landlord-tenant relationship was now purely commercial. He would go
bankrupt if he went on being so charitable: it would be impossible to
maintain either his property or his ancestral dignity.
Krishnagopal pondered deeply on the way that the times had so
greatly changed, and concluded that the rules of his own era no longer
applied to what the younger generation had to do. If one tried to
interfere from a distance, they would say, ‘Take back your property then;
we can’t manage it in any other manner.’ What was the point? It was
better to devote what was left of one’s life to God.

II
Things went on like this. After a great deal of litigation, wrangling and
argument, Bipinbihari had arranged nearly everything as he wanted.
Most tenants were afraid to resist his pressure; Mirja Bibi’s son
Achimaddi Bisvas was the only one who refused to give in.
Bipinbihari’s attacks on him were the most severe of all. Land given
away to a Brahmin could be justified by tradition, but it was impossible
to see why this son of a Muslim widow should be given land free or
nearly free. True, he had won a scholarship and learnt a little at school,
but this did not give him the right to be so above himself. Bipin learnt
from the older staff on the estate that the family had received favours
from the landlord for a long time – they did not know exactly why.
Maybe the widow had gone to him with tales of woe, and he had taken
pity on her. But to Bipin the favours seemed highly inappropriate. Never

having seen the family’s former poverty, he looked at their prosperity
and arrogance and felt they had cheated his soft-hearted, unsuspecting
father – had stolen some of the zamindar’s wealth.
Achimaddi was a very confident young man. He was determined not
to budge an inch from his rights, and a fierce contest developed. His
widowed mother urged repeatedly that it was stupid to take on the
zamindar: they had been protected so far – it was best to have faith in
that protection, and give the landlord what he wanted. ‘You don’t
understand these things, Mother,’ said Achimaddi.
Achimaddi lost at each stage as the case went through the courts. But
the more he lost, the more his tenacity increased. He staked all he had
on keeping all that he had.
One afternoon Mirja Bibi came with a small present of garden
vegetables and met Bipinbihari privately. Casting her plaintive eyes on
him as if caressing him with her motherly gaze, she said, ‘You are like
my son – may Allah preserve you. Do not ruin Achim, my dear – there’ll
be no virtue in that. I consign him to you: think of him as an unruly
younger brother. Son, do not begrudge him a tiny piece of your untold
wealth!’
Bipin was furious with the woman for impertinently using the
privilege of age to speak so familiarly to him. ‘You’re a woman,’ he said,
‘you don’t understand these things. If you’ve anything to tell me, send
your son.’ Mirja Bibi had now been told by another’s son as well as her
own that she didn’t understand these things. Praying to Allah, dabbing at
her eyes, the widow returned to her house.

III
The case went from the criminal court to the civil court, from the civil
court to the district court, from the district court to the High Court. It
continued for nearly eighteen months. By the time that Achimaddi was
awarded a partial victory in the appeal court, he was up to his neck in
debt. Moreover, he had escaped from the tiger on the river-bank only to
be assailed by the crocodile in the river. The money-lenders chose this
moment to put the court’s decree into action. A day was fixed for the

auctioning of all that Achimaddi had.
The day was Monday, market-day on the bank of a small river near
by. The river was high during the monsoon, so some of the trading was
on the bank, some of it in boats: the hubbub was continuous. Among the
produce of the season, jackfruit was especially plentiful, and there was
lots of hilsa-fish too. The sky was cloudy: many of the traders, fearing
rain, stuck bamboo-poles into the ground and stretched canopies over
their stalls.
Achimaddi had also come to do some shopping, but without a paisa in
his hand: no one would sell to him even on credit. He had brought a
kitchen-chopper and a brass plate, hoping to raise money by pawning
them.
Bipinbihari had strolled out to take the evening air, attended by a
couple of bodyguards with lāthis. Attracted by the crowd, he decided to
visit the market. He was just – out of interest – questioning Dvari the oilman about his earnings, when Achimaddi came at him charging and
roaring like a tiger, brandishing his chopper. The stallholders intervened
and quickly disarmed him. He was soon handed over to the police, and
the trading in the market continued as before.
It cannot be said that Bipinbihari was unhappy at this turn of events.
For a hunted animal to turn and have a go at the hunter is an atrocious
breach of etiquette; but never mind, the fellow would receive his due
punishment. The women of Bipin’s household were outraged by the
episode. The fellow was an impudent scoundrel! The prospect of his
punishment, though, consoled them.
Meanwhile, that same evening, Mirja Bibi’s house – foodless, childless
– grew darker than death. Everyone forgot what had happened, had
their dinner and went to bed: only for one old woman was it more
significant than anything else, yet there was no one in the whole world
to fight against it except for her: a few old bones and a frightened, bitter
heart in an unlit hut!

IV
Three days passed. On the next there was to be a hearing before the

Deputy Magistrate. Bipin himself was to give evidence. He had no
objection, even though the zamindar had never appeared in the witnessbox before. That morning at the appointed time, he put on a turban and
watch-chain and with great ostentation was carried in a palanquin to the
court. The court-room was packed: there had not been such a sensational
case for a long time.
Just before the case was to be heard, an attendant came up to
Bipinbihari and said something in his ear: somewhat flustered, saying he
was needed outside, he left the court-room. Outside, he saw his aged
father standing a little way off under a banyan tree. He was barefoot,
wore a nāmābali, and carried a Krishna-rosary: his slender body seemed
to glow with kindness; calm compassion for the world shone from his
brow. In his chapkan, jobbā and tight fitting pantaloons, Bipin had
difficulty in doing obeisance to his father. His turban slipped over his
nose, and his watch fell out of his pocket. Fumbling to replace them, he
invited his father to step into a lawyer’s house near by. ‘No,’ said
Krishnagopal, ‘what I need to say can be said here.’
Bipin’s attendants drove curious bystanders away. ‘Everything must be
done to release Achim,’ said Krishnagopal, ‘and the property taken from
him should be returned.’
‘Have you come all the way from Benares just to say this?’ asked
Bipin, amazed. ‘Why do you favour him so much?’
‘What would be the point of telling you why?’ said Krishnagopal.
Bipin was insistent. ‘I’ve managed to retrieve gifts of land from many
whom I felt were unworthy of them, Brahmins among them – and you
didn’t turn a hair. So why have you gone to such lengths over this
Muslim fellow? If, having gone so far, I release Achim and hand back
everything, what shall I say to people?’
Krishnagopal was silent for a while. Then, fiddling nervously with his
rosary, he said in a quavering voice, ‘If a frank explanation is necessary,
tell them that Achimaddi is your brother – my son.’
‘By a Muslim mother?’ said Bipin in horror.
‘Yes, my boy,’ said Krishnagopal.
Bipin was flabbergasted. At length he said, ‘You can tell me
everything later. Please come home now.’

‘No,’ said Krishnagopal, ‘I shall not live at home ever again. I’m
returning to Benares at once. Please do whatever your conscience
permits.’ Blessing him, fighting back tears, unsteady on his feet,
Krishnagopal set off back.
Bipin could not think of what to say or do. He stood in silence. But at
least he understood now what morals were like in the old days! How
superior he was to his father in education and character! This was what
happened when people had no ‘principles’! As he walked back to the
court, he saw Achim waiting outside – drained, exhausted, pale, whitelipped, red-eyed – captive between two guards, clad in dirty rags. And
this was Bipin’s brother!
Bipin was friendly with the Deputy Magistrate. The case was
dismissed on a technicality, and within a few days Achim was restored
to his former circumstances. But he did not understand the reason, and
other people were surprised too.
It soon got about, however, that Krishnagopal had appeared at the
time of the trial. All sorts of rumours circulated. Shrewd lawyers guessed
the truth of the matter. Among them, the lawyer Ramtaran had been
brought up and educated at Krishnagopal’s expense. He had all along
suspected – and now he could see clearly – that if you looked carefully,
even the most respectable could be caught out. However much a man
might finger his rosary, he was probably as much of a rogue as anyone
else. The difference between the respectable and the unrespectable was
that the former were hypocrites and the latter were not. In deciding,
however, that Krishnagopal’s famous generosity and piety were a sly
façade, Ramtaran found that an old and difficult problem had been
solved and, in addition, felt – through what logic I do not know – that
the burden of gratitude was lifted from his shoulders. What a relief!

Exercise-book
As soon as she learnt to write, Uma caused tremendous trouble. She
would write ‘Rain patters, leaves flutter’ on every wall of the house with
a piece of coal – in great, childish, curving letters. She found the copy of
The Secret Adventures of Haridas that her elder brother’s wife kept
beneath her pillow and wrote in pencil, ‘Black water, red flower’. Most
of the stars and planets in the new almanac that everyone in the house
used were, so to speak, eclipsed by her huge scribbles. In her father’s
daily account-book, in the middle of his calculations, she wrote:
He who learns to write
Drives a horse and cart.

Up to now she had not been interrupted in these literary endeavours; but
at last she met with a dire mishap.
Uma’s elder brother Gobindalal had a very benign look about him, but
he wrote perpetually for the newspapers. None of his friends or relatives
supposed from his conversation that he was a thinker, and indeed one
could not justly accuse him of thinking on any subject. Nevertheless he
wrote – and his opinions were in tune with most readers in Bengal. He
had recently, for example, completed an elegant essay demolishing – by
the spirit of his attack and the exuberance of his language rather than by
logic – some gravely false ideas about anatomy that were current in
European science.
In the quiet of the afternoon, Uma took her brother’s pen and ink and
wrote on the essay in bold letters:
So well-behaved is young Gopal

Whatever you give he eats it all.1

I don’t believe she meant this to be a dig at the readers of Gobindalal’s
essay, but he was beside himself with rage. First he smacked Uma; then
he took away her pencil-stub, her ink-smeared blunted pen and all her

other carefully accumulated writing implements. The little girl, quite
unable to understand the reason for such disgrace, sat in a corner and
cried her heart out.
When her punishment was finished, Gobindalal softened a little. He
returned the confiscated items, and tried to dispel the little girl’s distress
by giving her a well-bound, nicely ruled exercise-book.
Uma was seven years old at the time. From then on, this exercise-book
was under her pillow every night, and in her lap or under her arm all
day long. When with her hair plaited Uma was taken along by the maid
to the girls’ school in the village, the exercise-book went too. Some of
the girls were intrigued by the book, some coveted it, and some
begrudged her it.
In the first year that she had the exercise-book, she neatly wrote in it:
‘Birds are singing, Night is ending.’1 She would sit on the floor of her
bedroom embracing the exercise-book, chanting out loud and writing.
She accumulated many snatches of prose and rhyme in this way.
In the second year, she wrote some things of her own: very short but
very much to the point: no introduction or conclusion. For example, at
the end of ‘The Tiger and the Crane’ – a story in kathāmālā – a line was
added which is not to be found in that book or anywhere else in Bengali
literature. It was this: ‘I love Yashi very much.’
Let no one suppose that I am about to concoct a love-story! Yashi was
not an eleven-or twelve-year-old local boy: she was an old houseservant, whose actual name was Yashoda. But this one sentence should
not be taken as firm proof of Uma’s feelings towards her. Anyone
wanting to write an honest account of the matter would find that the
sentence was fully contradicted two pages later in the exercise-book.
This was not just a stray example: there were blatant contradictions in
Uma’s writings at every step. In one place one could read of her life-long
rift with Hari (not Hari meaning Krishna, but a girl at school called
Haridashi). But something a few lines below suggested there was no one
in the world whom she loved more than Hari.
The next year, when Uma was nine years old, a sānāi began to play one
morning. It was her wedding-day. The groom was called Pyarimohan,

one of Gobindalal’s fellow-writers. Although he was still quite young and
had acquired some education, modern ideas had not penetrated him at
all. He was therefore the darling of the neighbourhood. Gobindalal
adopted him as a model, though not with complete success.
Dressed in a Benares sari, her little face covered with a veil, Uma left
tearfully for her father-in-law’s house. Her mother said, ‘Do what your
mother-in-law tells you, my dear. Do the housework, don’t spend your
time reading and writing.’ And Gobindalal said, ‘Mind that you don’t go
scratching on walls; it’s not that sort of house. And make sure you don’t
scrawl on any of Pyarimohan’s writings.’
Uma’s heart trembled. She realized there would be no mercy in the
house where she was going; she would have to learn after endless
scoldings what things were regarded there as mistakes and faults.
The sānāi sounded on that day too, but I doubt if anyone in that
crowd of wedding-guests really understood what the girl felt in her
trembling heart, behind her veil, Benares sari and ornaments.
Yashi went along with Uma. She was supposed to settle her into her
in-laws’ house, then leave her there. The tender-hearted Yashi, after
much reflection, took Uma’s exercise-book along too. The book was a
piece of her parental home: a much-loved memento of her short
residence in the house of her birth; a brief record of parental affection,
written in round childish letters. It gave her, in the midst of domestic
duties that had come too early, a taste of the cherished freedom that is a
young girl’s due.
For the first few days that she was in her in-laws’ house she did not
write anything – she had no time. But the time came for Yashi to return;
and on the day that she left, Uma shut the door of her bedroom at
midday, took her exercise-book out of her tin box, and tearfully wrote:
‘Yashi has gone home, I shall go back to Mother too.’
Nowadays she had no leisure in which to copy out passages from Easy
Reader or The Dawn of Understanding; maybe she had no inclination
either. So there were no long passages dividing her own childish
writings. Below the sentence mentioned above was written: ‘If only Dādā
could take me home again, I would never spoil his writings again.’
Word had it that Uma’s father sometimes tried to invite her home for

a bit; but Gobindalal and Pyarimohan joined forces to prevent this.
Gobindalal said that now was the time to learn her duties towards her
husband: bringing her back to the old atmosphere of affection would
disturb her quite unnecessarily. He wrote such a shrewd and witty essay
on the subject, that his like-minded readers could not but agree. Uma got
wind of what was happening, and wrote in her exercise-book: ‘Dādā, I
beg you, take me home again just once – I promise not to annoy you.’
One day she was in her room with the door closed, writing something
similarly pointless. Her sister-in-law Tilakmanjari, who was very
inquisitive, decided she must find out what Uma got up to behind her
closed door. When she peeped through a crack and saw her writing, she
was amazed: the Goddess of Learning1 had never before made so secret a
visitation to the female quarters of the house. Her younger sister
Kanakmanjari came and peeped too; and her youngest sister
Anangamanjari – precariously standing on tiptoe to peer at the mysteries
within.
Uma, as she wrote, suddenly heard three familiar voices giggling
outside the room. Realizing what was afoot, she hastily shut the
exercise-book in her box and buried her face in the bedclothes.
Pyarimohan was most perturbed when he was told about what had
been seen. Reading and writing, once started, would lead to play-and
novel-writing, and household norms would be endangered. As he
thought further about the matter, he worked out a most subtle theory.
Perfect marriage was produced by a combination of female and male
power. But if through women’s education female power was weakened,
then male power would prevail unchecked; and the clash between male
and male would be so destructive that marriage would be annihilated,
and women would be widowed. As yet, no one had been able to
challenge this theory.
That evening Pyarimohan came to Uma’s room and gave her a
thorough scolding, and ridiculed her too, saying: ‘So the wife wants to
go to an office with a pen behind her ear? We’ll have to get her a śāmlā!’
Uma could not understand what he meant. She had never read his
articles, so she hadn’t learnt to appreciate his wit. But she was deeply
humiliated, and wished that the earth would swallow her up.
For a long time after she wrote nothing. But one autumn morning she

heard a beggar-woman singing an āgamanī song. She listened quietly,
resting her chin on the bars of the window. The autumn sunshine
brought back so many memories of childhood; hearing an āgamanī song
as well was too much to bear.
Uma could not sing; but ever since she learnt how to write, her habit
had been to write down songs, to make up for not being able to sing
them. This was what the beggar-woman sang that day:
The citizens say to Uma’s1 mother,
‘Your lost star has returned.’
The Queen runs, madly weeping,
‘Where is Uma, tell me?
My Uma has returned –
Come, my darling,
Let me clasp you to me!’
Stretching her arms,
Hugging her mother’s neck,
Uma chides her, sore at heart:
‘Why did you not send for me?’

With the same soreness of heart, Uma’s eyes filled with tears. She
furtively called the singer over and, shutting the door of her room, began
to make a strangely spelt copy of the song in her exercise-book.
Tilakmanjari, Kanakmanjari and Anangamanjari saw this through the
crack in the door and shouted out, clapping their hands: ‘Baudidi, we’ve
seen everything, Baudidi!’ Uma opened the door and said in great
distress, ‘Dear sisters, don’t tell anyone, please, I beg you. I won’t do it
again, I won’t write again.’ Then she saw that Tilakmanjari had her eye
on the exercise-book. She ran over to it and clasped it to her breast. Her
sisters-in-law struggled to snatch it from her; failing to do so, Ananga
called her brother.
Pyarimohan came and sat down on the bed sternly. ‘Give me that
book,’ he thundered. When his command was not obeyed, he growled in
an even deeper voice, ‘Give it to me.’
The girl held the exercise-book to her breast and looked at her
husband, entreating him with her gaze. When she saw that Pyarimohan
was about to force it from her, she hurled it down, covered her face with
her hands, and fell to the floor.

Pyarimohan picked up the exercise-book and loudly read out from her
childish writings. As she listened, Uma tried to clutch the nethermost
depths of the earth. The other girls collapsed into peals of laughter.
Uma never got the exercise-book back again. Pyarimohan also had an
exercise-book full of various subtly barbed essays, but no one was
philanthropic enough to snatch his book away and destroy it.

Forbidden Entry
One morning two young boys were standing by the roadside laying bets
on an extremely daring enterprise. They were debating whether it was
possible to take some flowers from the mādhabī-creeper in the temple
compound. One of the boys was saying that he would be able to do it,
and the other was saying, ‘You never will.’ To understand why this was
easy to talk about but not so easy to do requires a fuller explanation.
Jaykali Devi, widow of the late Madhabchandra Tarkabachaspati, was
the guardian of the temple, which was dedicated to the Blessed Lord
Krishna. Her husband had been given the title ‘Tarkabachaspati’ (‘Master
of Debate’) in his capacity as teacher at the village ṭol, but had never
been able to prove to his wife that he deserved it. Some pundits were of
the opinion that, because talking and arguing were his wife’s preserve,
he amply merited the title by virtue of being her ‘Master’.1 Actually,
Jaykali did not say very much; she could stop even the mightiest verbal
torrents with a couple of words or by saying nothing at all.
Jaykali was a tall, strong, sharp-nosed, tough-minded woman.
Through her husband’s mismanagement, property endowed to them for
the maintenance of the temple had almost been lost. His widow, by
collecting all the arrears, fixing new limits, and recovering claims that
had lapsed for many years, had managed to get everything straight
again. No one could do her out of a single paisa.
Because this woman had many of the qualities of a man, she had no
female friends. Women were terrified of her. Gossip, small talk and tears
were all anathema to her. Men were afraid of her too, because she could
rebuke the bottomless idleness of the men of the village with a stare so
fierce and silently contemptuous that it pierced their fat inertia, cut
them to the quick. She had a remarkable capacity for contempt and a
remarkable capacity for conveying contempt. Anyone she judged to be at
fault, she could blast with her manner and expression, with a word or
with no word. She kept close tabs on everything that happened in the
village, good or bad. She effortlessly dominated all its affairs. Wherever

she went she was in charge: neither she nor anyone doubted it.
She was expert in nursing the sick, but her patients feared her as
much as death. If anyone broke the treatment or diet she prescribed, her
anger was hotter than the fever itself. Her tall, strict presence hung over
the village like the Judgement of God; no one loved her, yet no one
dared to defy her. She knew everyone, yet no one was as isolated as she.
The widow had no children, but she had taken on the upbringing of
two orphaned nephews. No one could say that the lack of a male parent
had deprived them of discipline, or that they had been spoilt by blind
affection from their aunt. The elder of them was now eighteen. From
time to time the question of his marriage arose, and the boy was not
averse to the bonds of love. But his aunt’s mind was shut to that happy
prospect. Unlike other women, she did not find the blooming of love in a
young married couple particularly pleasing to contemplate. On the
contrary, it was to her unpleasantly likely that, like other married men,
her nephew would sit about the house, growing fatter by the day as his
wife pampered him. No, she said, Pulin had better start earning – then
he could bring a wife into the house. Neighbours were shocked by her
harsh words.
The temple was Jaykali’s most precious possession. She was never
remiss in tending, dressing and bathing the deity. The two attendant
Brahmins feared her far more than the god himself. Formerly the god
had not received his full rations, because there was another object of
worship living secretly in the temple, a ‘temple-maid’ called Nistarini.
Offerings of ghee, milk, curds and butter were shared between heaven
and hell. But under Jaykali’s iron rule, offerings were enjoyed in full by
the deity. Lesser gods had to find means of support elsewhere.
The widow made sure that the courtyard of the temple stayed
spotlessly clean – not a blade of grass anywhere. On a trellis to one side
there was a mādhabī-creeper: whenever it shed dry leaves, Jaykali
removed them. She could not bear the slightest invasion of the sanctity,
cleanliness and orderliness of the temple. Previously local boys playing
hide-and-seek had hidden inside the courtyard, and sometimes baby
goats came and chewed at the bark of the mādhabī. There was no chance
of that now. Except on festival-days, boys were not permitted to enter
the courtyard, and hungry little goats, beaten by sticks, had to run

bleating to their mothers.
Irreverent persons, even if they were close relatives, were not allowed
to enter the temple yard. Her brother-in-law, who liked eating chickenmeat cooked by Muslims, had come to the village once to see his
relations, and had wanted to visit the temple; Jaykali objected so
violently, there had nearly been a complete rift between her and her
elder sister. The excessive zeal with which the widow watched over the
temple seemed quite crazy to ordinary people.
Whereas in other spheres Jaykali was harsh and haughty and
independent, in her care of the temple she surrendered herself
completely. To the image inside it she was mother, wife and slave: she
treated it with watchfulness, tenderness, grace and humility. The stone
temple with its stone image was the only thing that brought out her
femininity. It was her husband and son: her entire world.
Readers will now appreciate what limitless courage was required to
steal mādhabī-blossoms from the temple courtyard. The boy concerned
was Nalin, the younger of her nephews. He knew what his aunt was like,
but discipline had not tamed him. He was drawn to anything risky, and
was always eager to break restrictions. It was said that in childhood his
aunt had been like that too.
Jaykali was, at the time, sitting on her verandah telling her rosary,
gazing with motherly love and devotion at the image of the deity. The
boy crept up from behind and stood underneath the mādhabī. He found
that the flowers on the lower branches had all been used for pūjā. So he
gingerly started to climb the trellis. Seeing some buds on a high branch,
he stretched with the whole length of his body and arm to pick them;
but the strain on the frail trellis was too great, and it noisily collapsed.
Boy and creeper fell sprawling on the ground together.
This glorious feat brought Jaykali running: she grabbed him by the
arms and wrenched him up from the ground. He had been knocked
badly by his fall, but one could not call this a punishment, because it
had not come from a living thing. So now Jaykali’s living punishment
rained down on the boy’s bruised body. He suffered it in silence, without
a single tear. His aunt then dragged him into a room and bolted the
door. He was given no food that afternoon. Hearing this, the servant-girl
Mokshada begged – tearfully and with trembling voice – that the boy be

forgiven. Jaykali would not be moved. No one in the house dared give
food to the hungry boy behind Jaykali’s back.
The widow sent for men to repair the trellis, and once again took her
seat on the verandah with her rosary in hand. A little later Mokshada
came up to her and said timorously, ‘Thākurmā, the young master is
weeping with hunger: shall I give him some milk?’
‘No,’ said Jaykali with her face set. Mokshada withdrew again. From
the room in the hut near by Nalin’s plaintive whimpering gradually
swelled into wails of anger – until, much later, he was too exhausted to
go on, and only an occasional panting sob reached the ears of his aunt as
she sat telling her rosary.
Nalin’s distress had subsided into exhausted near-silence when the
sounds of another unhappy creature – mixed with the distant noise of
people running and shouting – loudly disturbed the road outside the
temple. Suddenly footsteps were heard in the temple yard. Jaykali
turned and saw something heaving under the creeper. ‘Nalin!’ she
shouted furiously. No one replied. She thought that Nalin must have
somehow escaped from his prison and was trying to enrage her again.
She stepped down into the yard, with her lips grimly clenched. ‘Nalin!’
she shouted again as she neared the creeper. There was still no answer.
Lifting up a branch, she saw an extremely dirty and frightened pig
lurking in the thick foliage.
The creeper that was a modest substitute, in this brick-built courtyard,
for the groves of Vrindavan, the scent of whose blossoms recalled the
fragrant breath of the gopīs and evoked a gorgeous dream of dalliance
along the banks of the Yamuna – to think that the sacredness of it,
tended by the widow with total devotion, had been suddenly desecrated
by this sordid event! An attendant Brahmin came with a stick to drive
out the pig, but Jaykali rushed to stop him, and bolted the gate of the
temple from inside.
A short while later a crowd of drunken Doms arrived at the temple
gate and began to clamour for the animal they intended to sacrifice.
‘Clear off, you scum,’ shouted Jaykali from behind the closed gate. ‘Don’t
you dare besmirch my temple.’
The crowd dispersed. Even though they had as good as seen it with
their own eyes, it was beyond belief that Mā Jaykali had given asylum to

an unclean animal inside her Krishna temple.
The great god of all mortal creatures was delighted at this odd little
episode, even if the petty god of mean and narrow social custom was
mightily outraged.

In the Middle of the Night
‘Doctor! Doctor!’
Someone pestering me! In the middle of the night! I opened my eyes
to see our local zamindar, Dakshinacharan Babu. I scrambled to my feet,
dragged out my broken-backed armchair for him, sat him down, and
looked anxiously into his face. It was half past two by my watch.
His face was pale and his eyes were staring as he spoke: ‘The same
trouble again tonight – your medicine hasn’t worked.’
‘Perhaps you’ve been drinking again,’ I said, hesitantly.
He flared up. ‘You’re quite wrong there – it isn’t drink. Unless I tell
you the whole story from beginning to end, you’ll never know the
reason.’
The small tin kerosene lamp on the shelf was guttering, and I raised
the wick. It shone a little more brightly and made lots of smoke. I tucked
up my dhoti and sat cross-legged on a packing-case covered with
newspaper. Dakshinacharan Babu began.
‘You don’t find many housewives like my first wife. But I was young
then, and susceptible, and always immersed in poetry, so undiluted
housewifery didn’t appeal to me much. Those lines of Kalidasa kept
coming to me:
A wife is a counsellor, friend and lover;
In the fine arts, it’s a joy to teach her.

But I didn’t get much joy in my efforts to teach my wife, and if I tried to
address her in terms of a lover she would burst out laughing. Like Indra’s
elephant floundering in the Ganges, the finest gems of poetry and
fondest endearments were swept away instantly by her laughter. She was
marvellously good at laughing.
‘Four years went by, and then I fell terribly ill. I had boils on my lips; I
was delirious with fever; I was fighting for my life. No one thought I

would survive. Things got so far, that the doctor gave me up for lost. But
then a relative of mine brought a monk from somewhere: he gave me a
root mixed with ghee – and, whether through the power of this medicine
or through Fate, I recovered.
‘While I was ill my wife didn’t rest for a minute. Death’s envoys
gathered at the door for those few days, and a feeble woman fought
them continuously with mere human strength and the utmost power of
feeling. She seemed to clutch and press my unworthy life to her breast as
if it were her child, giving all her love and care. She didn’t eat, or sleep;
she had no thought for anything else in the world.
‘Like a vanquished tiger, Death dropped me from its jaws and went
away; but as he went, he dealt my wife a heavy blow with his paw. She
was pregnant at the time, and after a short time gave birth to a dead
baby. Various complicated illnesses began after that. I had to look after
her. This used to embarrass her. “What are you doing?” she would say.
“What will people think? Don’t keep coming in and out of my room like
this all the time!”
‘At night, when she was feverish, if I tried to fan her by pretending I
was fanning myself, a tug-of-war for the fan would ensue. If sometimes
my nursing took me ten minutes past my meal-time, I had to beg and
coax her to accept it. The slightest attention seemed to do more harm
than good. She would say, “It’s not right for a man to do all this.”
‘I dare say you’ve seen our house at Baranagar. There’s a garden in
front, between the house and the Ganges. On the south side of the house,
just beneath our bedroom, my wife enclosed a small plot with a henna
hedge and made a garden of her own. Out of all the garden, that plot
was the most unostentatious and natural. That is to say, colour did not
take precedence over scent, or botanical variety over blooms; and there
were no tags with Latin names next to nondescript plants in tubs.
Instead, there were roses, jasmine, gardenia, oleander and tuberose in
wild abundance. A seat of white marble had been made round the base
of a huge bakul tree. Before her illness, my wife herself stood at it twice
a day, scrubbing it clean. On summer evenings, when her housework
was finished, she sat there. She could watch the Ganges, but Babus, in
company-yachts, could not see her.
‘After many days of being confined to bed, she suddenly said one

moonlit Caitra evening, “I’m sick of being shut up indoors; today I shall
go and sit in my garden for a while.”
‘I slowly and gingerly guided her to the stone seat under the bakul
tree, and laid her down there. I would have been quite happy to have
her head resting on my knee, but I knew she would find this odd; so I
brought a pillow for her instead.
‘Full-blown bakul-flowers floated down in ones and twos, and
shadowy moonlight shone through gaps in the branches on to her wasted
face. It was still and peaceful all around; and as I sat beside her in the
fragrant shadows and looked at her face, tears came to my eyes.
‘I slowly edged towards her and took her hot, emaciated hand in
mine. She made no objection. After sitting in silence like this for a while,
my heart swelled and I burst out, “I shall never forget your love!” At
once I realized I should not have said that. My wife laughed. In that
laugh there was modesty, pleasure, and some disbelief; but also a
considerable dose of the keenest mockery. She offered not a word of
argument, but her laughter said, “You’ll never forget? That’s impossible
and I don’t expect it either.”
‘For fear of this sweet piercing laugh, I never dared use amorous
words with my wife. Whatever came to my mind when I was alone
seemed utterly stupid if I tried to come out with it to her face. To this
day, I cannot understand why words which, when I saw them in print,
made my eyes stream with tears, seemed so ludicrous when spoken.
‘Arguments deal in words, but you cannot argue with a laugh; so all I
could do was stay silent. The moonlight grew brighter; a koel-bird was
calling more and more impatiently. I sat and wondered if, even on a
moonlit night like this, the female koel-bird was deaf.
‘Despite every medical effort my wife’s illnesses showed no sign of
recovery. The doctor said, “Why not try a change of air?” I took her to
Allahabad.’
Dakshinacharan Babu suddenly stopped at this point. He eyed me
suspiciously, and then sat thinking with his head in his hands. I also kept
silent. The kerosene lamp on the shelf was dim now, and the whining of
the mosquitoes could be heard clearly in the still room. Suddenly he

broke his silence and began again: ‘At Allahabad my wife was treated by
Dr Haran. He spent a long time treating her, but finally he too said what
I and my wife already knew: that her condition could not be cured. She
would be ill for the rest of her life.
‘One day she said to me, “I shan’t get better and neither can I hope for
a speedy death. Why should you spend your life with a living corpse?
You should marry again.”
‘She saw this as a logical and rational solution: she had not the
slightest sense of anything great or heroic or peculiar in it. Now it was
my turn to laugh – had I had any of her talent for laughter. Like the hero
of a novel, I gravely and pompously started: “For as long as there is life
in my body –”
‘ “Come, come,” she interrupted. “Don’t go on! Hearing you talk like
that is enough to kill me!”
‘ “I shall not be able to love anyone else –” I continued, refusing to
give in. My wife laughed loudly at this, so I had to stop.
‘I don’t know if I ever admitted it to myself at the time, but I can now
see I was wearying of all this nursing with no hope of recovery. I never
imagined I would back out of it; but I was dismayed by the prospect of
spending my whole life with an incurable patient. When as a young man
I had looked ahead, my whole future seemed packed with the magic of
love, the lure of pleasure, the charm of beauty. But that was all a mirage
now, and a hopeless, barren desert stretched out in front of me.
‘My wife must have perceived this inner tiredness in my nursing of
her. I did not know it at the time, but I am sure she could read me as
easily as the unjoined letters of a child’s first reader. So when I cast
myself in the role of a romantic hero, and solemnly mouthed my
poeticisms, she laughed with affection, but also with helpless merriment.
I still want to die with shame when I think of her godlike insight into my
innermost thoughts.
‘Dr Haran was of the same caste as ourselves. I was often invited to his
house. After a few days of going there, he introduced me to his daughter.
The girl was unmarried; she was about fifteen. The doctor told me she
was not yet married because he had not found a groom to his liking. But
from others I heard a rumour of some kind of scandal in the family. She

could not, though, be faulted in any other respect. She was as
accomplished as she was beautiful. We talked of many things, and
sometimes I returned home late – past the time for my wife’s dose of
medicine. She knew I had gone to Dr Haran’s house, but never asked the
reason for my lateness.
‘I began to see a new mirage in the desert. Bursting with thirst, I saw
clear, overflowing water lapping and purling before me. However hard I
tried, I could not turn my mind from it, and my wife’s sick-room became
doubly unattractive to me. My nursing and doses of medicine began to
fail in their regularity.
‘Dr Haran said to me sometimes that death was best for those whose
illnesses could not be cured, because they could take no pleasure in
being alive and were a misery to others. General statements like this are
permissible: he should not, however, have said such a thing with
reference to my wife. But doctors become so indifferent to human
mortality that they don’t always understand people’s feelings.
‘Suddenly one day I heard my wife saying in the next room, “Doctor,
why are you swelling your earnings by making me swallow all these
useless medicines? Since my life has become so wretched, give me
something to carry me off!”
‘ “Come, come,” said the doctor. “You mustn’t talk like that.”
‘It cut me to the quick to hear such a thing. As soon as the doctor had
gone, I went to my wife’s room and sat on the edge of her bed, slowly
stroking her forehead. “It’s very hot in this room,” she said. “You go out.
It’s time for your walk. If you don’t go, you won’t feel hungry in the
evening.”
‘Going for a walk meant going to the doctor’s house. I had told my
wife that I needed to be out for some of the day in order to work up an
appetite. I’m certain now that she saw through this deception. I was
stupid, so I thought she was stupid too.’
Dakshinacharan was silent again after this, with his head in his hands.
At last he said, ‘Give me a glass of water.’ He drank the water and went
on:

‘One day the doctor’s daughter Manorama expressed a desire to meet my
wife. I wasn’t exactly pleased with this proposal, but I had no reason to
refuse it. So one evening she came along to where we were staying.
‘My wife was in even greater pain than usual. On days when the pain
was bad, she would lie totally still and silent: only when she clenched
her fist or looked blue in the face could one tell what agony she was in.
There was no movement at all in the room that evening; I sat quietly on
the edge of the bed. Maybe she had no strength to tell me to go for my
walk, or maybe she wanted me to stay with her at a time of such
suffering. The kerosene light was by the door, in case it hurt her eyes.
All that could be heard in the hushed darkness was a heavy sigh from
my wife whenever the pain abated.
‘Manorama appeared at the door, and the light from the kerosene
lamp fell on to her face. She lingered in the doorway, making out
nothing at first in the mixture of light and dark. My wife started and
clutched my hand. “Who’s she?” she said. Frightened in her weakened
state by the sight of an unknown person, she muttered two or three
times, “Who’s she? Who’s she? Who’s she?”
‘Like a fool, I first replied, “I don’t know.” But something seemed to
lash me like a whip as I spoke, and I quickly said, “Oh – she’s Dr Haran’s
daughter.”
‘My wife looked up at me; I couldn’t bring myself to look at her. Then
she murmured to the visitor, “Come in”, and to me, “Hold up the light.”
Manorama came in and sat down. She talked with my wife for a bit.
‘Then the doctor appeared. He had brought two bottles with him from
his dispensary. He showed them to my wife and said, “You should rub
on the lotion in the blue bottle and take the other by mouth. Make sure
you don’t mix them up, for the massage-lotion is very poisonous.”
‘Warning me too to be very careful, he put the bottles on the bedside
table; and as he said goodbye he called his daughter to come with him.
“Why can’t I stay, Father?” she said. “There’s no other woman to help
with the nursing.”
‘ “No, no, please don’t trouble yourself,” said my wife in alarm. “We
have an old servant – she looks after me like a mother.”
‘ “How good your wife is!” said the doctor with a laugh. “She’s nursed

others for so long that she can’t stand anyone nursing her!”
‘As the doctor turned to leave with his daughter, my wife said, “Dr
Haran, my husband has been sitting in this closed room for too long.
Take him out with you.”
‘ “Come,” said the doctor to me, “come with us for a walk by the
river.”
‘I did not demur for long. As we left, the doctor once again warned my
wife about the two bottles.
‘I ate at the doctor’s house that night. It was late when I returned, and
my wife was tossing and turning. Stabbed with remorse, I asked, “Is the
pain worse?”
‘She stared at me, speechlessly, too choked to reply. I ran to fetch the
doctor again. For a long time, the doctor could not make out what was
wrong. Eventually he asked, “Is the pain worse? Why not rub on the
lotion?” He picked up the bottle from the table and, finding it empty,
asked, “Did you drink this medicine by mistake?” By a silent nod, my
wife answered that she had. The doctor immediately rushed back to his
house in a tonga to fetch a stomach-pump. I fell half-senseless on to my
wife’s bed.
‘Then, like a mother soothing a child, she pulled my head on to her
breast and by the touch of her hands tried to convey what she felt. By
the sad touch of her hands, she assured me again and again: “Don’t
grieve, it’s for the best – you’ll be happy, and that makes me die
happily.”
‘When the doctor returned, my wife’s torments were over.’
Complaining of the heat, Dakshinacharan took another drink of water.
Then he stepped outside and walked up and down the verandah a few
times before coming in and sitting down again. He did not seem to want
to go on talking: it was as though I myself was extracting the words from
him by a kind of sorcery. He began again:
‘I married Manorama and returned to Bengal. She had married me with
her father’s permission; but whenever I spoke affectionately to her,
whenever I tried to win her with loving words, she remained solemn and

unsmiling. There were misgivings, perhaps, at the back of her mind that
I didn’t quite fathom. It was at this time that my drinking got out of
hand.
‘One evening early in autumn I was walking with Manorama in our
garden at Baranagar. It was eerily dark. There was no sound even of
birds fluttering their wings in their nest – just the rustling of shadowy
jhāu bushes on either side as we walked.
‘Feeling tired, Manorama reached the white stone seat at the base of
the bakul tree, and lay down with her head on her arms. I sat down next
to her. The darkness was even denser there, though the bits of sky that
were visible were covered with stars. The crickets under the trees were
stitching, as it were, a narrow border of sound along the edge of the robe
of silence that had slipped down from the sky. I had been drinking that
afternoon, and my mind was in a fluid, maudlin state. As the darkness
pressed my eyes, the shadowy shape of my wife’s languid body, the dim
pallor of her loose sari, stirred me with inexorable passion. But she
seemed like a shadow herself – impossible to hold in my arms.
‘Suddenly the darkness over the jhāu bushes seemed to catch fire: a
thin, yellow crescent moon climbed slowly into the sky above the trees,
lighting the face of the woman slumped in her white sari on the white
stone seat. I could hold back no longer. I moved and clasped her hand
and said, “Manorama, you don’t believe me, but I do love you. I shall
never be able to forget you.”
‘I winced in alarm at my own words, remembering I had once spoken
in the very same way to someone else. And that very moment, above the
bakul tree, over the tops of the jhāu bushes, under the yellow slice of the
moon, right from the eastern to the far western bank of the Ganges, a
laugh sped swiftly, a rolling laugh. I cannot describe that heart-rending
laugh, the way it seemed to split the sky. I lost consciousness, and fell
from the stone seat.
‘When I came round, I found I was lying on my bed indoors. My wife
was saying, “Why did you pass out like that?”
‘ “Didn’t you hear?” I replied, trembling. “Didn’t you hear that
laughter, the way it filled the sky!”
‘ “Laughter, you call it?” said my wife, laughing herself. “A huge flock

of birds flew past, I heard the noise of their wings. Do you get frightened
by so little?”
‘In the light of day I could understand that it was indeed a flock of
birds in flight – ducks from the north coming to feed on the river
sandbanks. But by the evening, I could not believe that any more: I felt
that loud laughter was lying in wait to fill the darkness: at the slightest
opportunity it would burst out, splitting the dark and enveloping the
sky. Things reached such a pitch that after dusk each day I was
frightened even to speak to Manorama.
‘I decided to take her on a boat-trip, away from the Baranagar house.
My fears faded in the river’s late autumn breezes. For a few days we
were happy. Lured by the beauty around her, Manorama at last opened
slowly the locked door of her heart.
‘We sailed beyond the Ganges and Kharia and reached the Padma. The
awesome river had started her long winter sleep, lifeless and inert as a
hibernating snake. To the north, barren banks of sand stretched bleakly
towards the horizon; and in the villages on the steep southern banks,
mango-groves quaked and pleaded in the face of the river’s demonic
power. From time to time the Padma rolled over sleepily, and pieces of
the crumbling shore slapped and splashed as they broke away. We found
a good mooring and tied up the boat.
‘One day we wandered far from the boat. As the golden shadows of
the sunset faded, a clear full moon rose up before our eyes; and as a
great, unchecked flood of moonlight spread right up to the horizon, over
vast white sandbanks, I felt as if we alone were wandering in a
boundless dream-world, empty as the moon. Manorama was swathed in
a red shawl, flowing down from her head, wound round her face,
covering her whole body. As the silence thickened, and nothing showed
but an infinite, directionless whiteness and emptiness, Manorama slowly
brought out her hand and gripped mine; she edged close and seemed to
rest the whole of her mind and body, youth and existence on me. My
heart raced, and I wondered if love could ever be fulfilled indoors.
Where is there room for lovers except where the sky is open and naked
and endless like this? We seemed without home, without doors, without
anywhere to return to, free to wander without constraint through this
moonlit emptiness, hand in hand, heading nowhere.

‘Walking like this, we came to a pool of water in the middle of the
sand: the Padma had changed her course and the water had been left
trapped. A long bar of moonlight lay as if in a swoon across that
waveless, sleeping, desert-pool. We stood on the edge together: as
Manorama gazed at me pensively, her shawl slipped from her head. I
lifted her face – gleaming in the moonlight – and kissed her.
‘At once a voice resounded through the empty waste, saying three
times, “Who’s she? Who’s she? Who’s she?” I started in alarm, and my
wife shuddered too. But the next moment we realized it was not a
human voice, not a supernatural one either – just the call of the waterbirds scouring the sandbanks. They had been startled by the sight of
people approaching their safe retreat.
‘Shaken by our fear, we hurried back to the boat. We lay on our beds:
Manorama was exhausted and quickly fell asleep. But someone came and
stood by my mosquito-net in the dark, and pointing once at Manorama
with a long, thin, bony finger whispered ever so softly and indistinctly
into my ear, “Who’s she? Who’s she? Who’s she?”
‘I sat up and struck a match for the lamp. Instantly a gale of laughter
swept the shadowy figure away, shaking my mosquito-net, rocking the
boat, turning the blood of my sweat-soaked body to ice as it sped
through the dark night. Over the Padma it went, over the sandbanks,
over the sleeping fields and villages and towns, travelling on and on
across countries and peoples, gradually becoming fainter as it shrank
into the distance; leaving even the realm of life and death; becoming
thinner than the point of a needle, till it was too faint to hear, too faint
to imagine; yet there seemed to be endless sky inside my head whose
borders the sound could never cross however far it travelled. It went on
till I could bear it no more: I decided I’d have to turn out the light or I’d
never sleep – but as soon as I did so and lay down again, immediately
that strangulated voice returned to the darkness next to my mosquitonet, close to my ear: “Who’s she? Who’s she? Who’s she?” To the same
rhythm as the blood in my heart it continued: “Who’s she? Who’s she?
Who’s she?… Who’s she? Who’s she? Who’s she?” In the depth of the
night, on that silent boat, my round clock seemed to come to life too, its
hands pointing from the shelf at Manorama, and saying with its ticktock, “Who’s she? Who’s she? Who’s she?… Who’s she? Who’s she?

Who’s she?” ’
Dakshinacharan Babu had turned yellow as he spoke, and his voice was
hoarse. ‘Drink some more water,’ I said, touching him. My kerosene
lamp guttered and went out. I noticed that it was getting light outside.
The crows were cawing. Magpie-robins were whistling. An ox-cart
creaked past on the road in front of my house. Dakshinacharan’s
expression changed: there was no sign of fear any more. He seemed
ashamed that the sorcery of the night and the frenzy of his imaginary
fears had made him tell me so much. I felt that he blamed it on me.
Without a single civil word, he abruptly rose and left the house.
The next night, half-way through, there was a knocking at my door
again, and the sound of ‘Doctor! Doctor!’

Unwanted
Towards evening the storm grew steadily worse. What with the lashing
of the rain, the claps of thunder and flashes of lightning, it was like war
between gods and demons in the sky. Great black clouds rolled hither
and thither like banners proclaiming world-destruction; rebellious waves
danced across the river, crashing on the shore; huge trees in the garden
groaned as their branches heaved and thrashed to right and left.
Meanwhile in a bungalow in Chandernagore, in a shuttered room lit
only by an oil-lamp, a husband and wife sat on bedding spread out on
the floor by a bed and talked.
‘In a little while,’ Sharat Babu was saying, ‘you’ll be quite recovered,
and we can go back home.’
‘I’m better already,’ said Kiranmayi. ‘It won’t hurt me to go home
now.’
Any married person will know that the conversation was not actually
so brief. The question was simple, but the argument to and fro fell short
of a solution. It spun faster and faster like a boat without oars, till it
seemed in danger of sinking in floods of tears.
‘The doctor says,’ said Sharat Babu, ‘you should stay a bit longer.’
‘Does the doctor know everything?’ said Kiran.
‘You must know,’ said Sharat, ‘that this is the season back home in
which it’s easy to catch infections. You should wait for another month or
so.’
‘Are you saying there are no infections here?’ said Kiran.
What had happened was this. Kiran was loved by everyone in the
household, even by her mother-in-law. When she fell badly ill, they were
all alarmed; and when the doctor advised a change of air, her husband
and mother-in-law were pleased to take her, gladly abandoning work
and household. Village wiseacres questioned whether recovery would
necessarily arise from the change: wasn’t it rather modish and excessive
to make such a fuss about a young wife – as if no one else’s wife got ill

sometimes, or people were immortal in Chandernagore? Was there any
place where the prescriptions of Fate did not apply? But Sharat and his
mother paid no heed. The life of their darling Kiranmayi was more
important than the collective wisdom of the village. When a loved one is
threatened, people are often irrational.
Sharat took a bungalow in Chandernagore, and Kiran recovered from
her illness: she was just still rather weak. There was a touching
feebleness in her face and eyes, so that anyone looking at her felt, with
quaking heart, that she’d had a most narrow escape.
But Kiran was jolly by nature, gregarious. She didn’t like being alone
in this place. She had nothing to do in the house, no neighbours or
friends; simply nurturing her health all day bored her to death. The dose
of medicine every hour, the watching of her temperature and diet – it
was all very irksome. This was why husband and wife were quarrelling
in a shuttered room this stormy night.
So long as Kiran came up with replies, the argument proceeded
equally; but in the end she resorted to silence. She sat with her head
bowed and her face turned away from Sharat, who now found himself
weak and weaponless. He was just about to give up the fight, when the
Bearer was heard loudly calling from outside. Sharat opened the door.
He was told that a young Brahmin boy had been shipwrecked – he’d
swum ashore to their garden. Kiran’s anger and misery disappeared
when she heard this, and at once she sent some dry clothes from the
ālnā. In no time she had warmed a pan of milk and called for the boy to
come in.
He had long hair, large round eyes, and no sign of a moustache. Kiran
sat with him as he ate, and asked him about himself. She heard that he
belonged to a band of travelling players, and his name was Nilkanta.
They’d been engaged to perform at the Sinhas’ house near by, but had
been shipwrecked, and who knew what had happened to the others in
the troupe? The boy was a good swimmer, so he’d saved himself. Here
he was! Kiran felt a surge of tenderness towards him as she realized how
easily he could have died.
‘This will be a good thing,’ thought Sharat to himself. ‘Kiran has
something new to do – it will keep her going for a while.’ His mother,
too, welcomed the merit to be gained from caring for a Brahmin boy;

and Nilkanta himself was pleased to escape from death and his former
master into the arms of this rich family.
Before very long, Sharat and his mother began to change their minds.
They felt that the boy had stayed long enough – there’d be trouble if
they didn’t get rid of him soon. Nilkanta had begun to smoke Sharat’s
hookah in secret, puffing away grandly. On rainy days he would
shamelessly take Sharat’s favourite silk umbrella and strut around the
village making new friends. A dirty stray dog he had petted brazenly
frequented Sharat’s finely furnished room, leaving pawprints on the
spotless floor-cover to record its gracious visits. A large circle of young
admirers formed round Nilkanta, and the village mangoes were given no
chance to ripen that year.
Kiran was far too lavish with the boy – there was no doubt of that.
Her husband and mother-in-law often took her to task for this, but she
ignored them. She decked him out like a Babu, giving him Sharat’s old
shirts and socks, and new shoes, dhoti and chadar. She would call him at
whim, to satisfy her need to show affection as well as her sense of fun.
She would sit smiling on the bed, pān-box beside her, with a maidservant
combing and drying her long wet hair, while Nilkanta acted with
flamboyant gestures the story of Nala and Damayanti. This way, the long
afternoon passed quickly. She tried to get Sharat to come and watch the
performance, but this annoyed him, and in any case in front of Sharat
Nilkanta’s talent failed to shine. Sometimes Kiran’s mother-in-law came,
attracted by the gods in the story; but her customary afternoon
sleepiness soon defeated her piety – she would end up lying on her back.
Nilkanta was often subjected to cuffs and boxes on the ear from
Sharat, but used as he was from birth to even harsher methods of
discipline he didn’t feel either hurt or dishonoured. He firmly believed
that just as the world was divided between sea and land, so human life
was divided between food and beatings – and beatings were the larger
part of it.
It was difficult to tell exactly how old he was. If he was fourteen or
fifteen, one would say his face had matured beyond his years; if he was
seventeen or eighteen, one would call him underdeveloped. He was
younger than he looked, or else he looked younger than he was. Because
he had joined the troupe of players at an early age, he acted Radha,

Damayanti, Sita, and ‘Vidya’s confidante’. The needs of his master and
the will of God coincided, and his growth stopped. Everyone thought of
him as small, and he thought of himself as small: he was never treated as
befitted his true age. Through such causes natural and unnatural, by the
time he was seventeen, he looked more like an overdeveloped fourteenyear-old than an underdeveloped seventeen-year-old. His lack of
moustache added to this false impression. Whether from smoking
tobacco, or from using language ill-suited to his years, his lips had an
adult curl to them; but his eyes, with their large pupils, were simple and
childish. One could say that inside he was a child, but his yātrā-life had
made him adult on the surface.
Nature’s relentless laws, however, worked on him as he stayed on in
Sharat Babu’s Chandernagore bungalow. Held back at the threshold for
so long, he quietly crossed it at last. His seventeen or eighteen years of
growth attained their proper ripeness.
The change was not evident from the outside, but it was there in the
way Nilkanta felt hurt and embarrassed when Kiran continued to treat
him like a boy. One day she frivolously asked him to dress as a female
sakhī: her request was suddenly awkward for him, though he couldn’t
see why it was so. These days, if she asked him to imitate a yātrāperformance, he would run from her sight. He was no longer willing to
think of himself as a juvenile member of a sordid yātrā-troupe. He had
even made up his mind to try to learn to read and write with the
manager of the bungalow. But because Nilkanta was Kiran’s pet, the
manager couldn’t stand him; and so unaccustomed was he to
concentrated study that the letters swam before his eyes. He would sit
for hours on the river-bank leaning against a champak tree, with a book
open on his lap: the water gurgled gently, boats floated past, fidgety
birds on the branches made their irrelevant chirping comments, and
Nilkanta kept his eyes on the book – but what he was thinking he alone
knew, or maybe he didn’t. He could hardly move from one sentence to
another, but he liked to feel he was reading a book. Whenever a boat
passed, he would hold up the book impressively, mutter, and make a
great show of reading; but as soon as the spectators had gone, his
enthusiasm waned again.
Formerly he sang yātrā-songs mechanically; but now their melodies

caused a strange disturbance in his mind. The words were utterly trivial,
full of meretricious wordplay: their meaning was impenetrable – but
when he sang,
O swan, swan, Brahmin twice born,1
Why are you so heartless?
Say for what good, in this wild wood,
Do you threaten the life of a princess?

he was suddenly now transported to a different life and world. The
familiar scene around him and his insignificant life were transformed
into song, took on a new appearance. The swan and the princess created
extraordinary pictures in his mind: who he thought he was he couldn’t
exactly say, but he forgot he was an orphan boy from a yātrā-troupe.
Just as a miserable grubby child in a wretched hovel somewhere listens
at night to the story of ‘The Prince, the Princess and the Ruby’, and in
the dimly lit darkness of his dingy home is released from deprivation,
finding in a fairy-tale world in which anything is possible a new beauty,
a brighter aspect, a matchless power; so this yātrā-boy was able to see,
through the tunes of these songs, both himself and his world in a new
light. The sound of the water, the rustling of leaves, the call of birds, the
smiling face of the kind woman who had given this friendless boy her
protection, her loving bangle-laden arms, her preciously beautiful lotuspink feet – all were transformed into music by who knows what
miraculous magic! But another time this musical mirage was swept
away: the yātrā-boy with his long shaggy hair was rediscovered, and
Sharat – informed by the owner of a mango-orchard – was upon him,
thwacking him with slaps on his cheeks; and Nilkanta would flee to his
band of devoted followers to seek new excitement on land or in water or
the branches of trees.
Meanwhile Sharat’s brother Satish had come to stay in the house for
his Calcutta college-holiday. Kiran was delighted – now she had
something new to occupy her. He was equal to her in age: in her dress,
manners, or in serving him at meals she teased him at every turn.
Sometimes she smeared her palms with vermilio and pressed them over
his eyes; sometimes she wrote ‘monkey’ on the back of his shirt;
sometimes she bolted his door from outside and ran off merrily. Satish

was not a man to be outdone: he would get his own back by stealing her
keys, putting chillies in her pān, or slyly tying the end of her sari to her
bed. Thus they spent the day teasing and chasing and laughing – or
quarrelling, weeping, entreating and then making up again.
Something got into Nilkanta now. He could not think of a reason for
quarrelling with anyone, yet was full of bitterness and unease. He began
to be needlessly nasty to the boys who followed him around; he gave his
pet dog undeserved kicks, so that it yelped noisily; he violently slashed
at weeds with a stick as he walked along.
Kiran loved to see people eat well, to sit and serve them with their
food. Nilkanta was a good eater: it was not hard to get him to take more
and more of whatever he liked. So Kiran would often call him and serve
him herself – it gave her special pleasure to watch him enjoying his food.
But now that Satish was here, Kiran often did not have time to sit with
Nilkanta as he ate. Formerly his appetite had not been affected by her
absence: he would even rinse the milk-pan and drink the water. But now
if she didn’t call him he was sick at heart and felt a bitter taste in his
mouth: he would rise without finishing, telling the maid in a husky voice
that he wasn’t hungry. He hoped that Kiran would send for him if she
heard about this, entreat him to take some food; he resolved that he
would not give in, would go on saying he wasn’t hungry. But no one told
her, and she didn’t send for him: the maidservant finished up the food
that was left. He would then turn out the lamp in his room, throw
himself down on the dark bed, sobbing and choking and pressing his
face into the pillow. But what use was this? Who took any notice? Who
came to give him comfort? Eventually sleep – kindest of nurses – came
with her gentle touch to bring relief to this sad, motherless boy.
Nilkanta was convinced that Satish was running him down before
Kiran. On days when she was silent for no reason, he was sure she was
angry with him because of something that Satish had said. He often now
prayed to the gods fiercely, ‘May I be Satish in another life, and may
Satish be me.’ He knew that a curse delivered by a Brahmin with full
concentration never failed, and he therefore as good as burnt himself
with passion as he put the fire of Brahma on to Satish, while peals of
merry laughter – Satish’s laugh mixed with Kiran’s – came down from
the room above.

Nilkanta did not dare to come out in open enmity with Satish, but
took every opportunity to cause him minor inconveniences. If Satish left
his soap on the steps down to the Ganges while he went for a dip,
Nilkanta would swoop and run off with it, so that when Satish returned
it was no longer there. Once when swimming he suddenly saw his best
embroidered shirt floating away: he assumed it had flown in the wind,
but there didn’t seem to be any wind blowing.
One day Kiran, wanting to entertain Satish, called Nilkanta and asked
him to sing some yātrā-songs. Nilkanta made no reply. Surprised, she
asked what had happened. Again Nilkanta was silent. She asked once
more. ‘I’ve forgotten them,’ he said, and went out.
At last it was time for Kiran to return home. Everyone started to get
ready: Satish too was to go back with them. But no one said anything to
Nilkanta. No one seemed even to consider whether he would go or stay.
Kiran eventually proposed to take him; but when her mother-in-law,
husband and brother-in-law all objected with one voice, Kiran too
abandoned her resolve. Finally two days before they were due to leave,
she called the boy and gently advised him to return to his village.
To hear her speak tenderly to him again after such long neglect was
too much for Nilkanta, and he burst out crying. Kiran’s eyes, too, filled
with tears. She realized with great distress how wrong she had been
temporarily to encourage affection in a person she would have to leave.
Satish was near by at the time. Infuriated by the sight of a grown boy
weeping, he snapped, ‘Good God! At the drop of a hat, overcome with
snivelling!’ Kiran rebuked him for this heartless remark. ‘You don’t
understand, Baudi,’ said Satish. ‘You believe in everyone too much. You
knew nothing about him, yet you let him live here like a king. He’s
frightened of being small fry again – that’s why he’s making such a
scene. He knows that a couple of tears will sway you.’
Nilkanta rushed out of the room. In his mind he was stabbing an
image of Satish with a knife, piercing him with needles, setting him on
fire. Satish’s actual body remained unscathed: the only blood that flowed
was from Nilkanta’s heart.
Satish had brought from Calcutta a fancy inkstand he had purchased,
with two shell-boats on either side to hold the ink, and a German silver
swan in the middle with its wings spread and beak open to hold the

pens. Satish prized this greatly; he would even sometimes polish it
carefully with a silk handkerchief. Kiran would often jokingly tap the
swan’s beak with her finger and sing,
O swan, swan, Brahmin twice born,
Why are you so heartless?

– and joking arguments would follow between her and her brother-inlaw about it.
The morning before their departure, Satish could not find the
inkstand. Kiran laughed and said, ‘Your swan has flown away to search
for your Damayanti!’ But Satish was incensed. He was certain that
Nilkanta had stolen the thing – he could even find witnesses who had
seen him loitering near Satish’s room the previous night. The accused
was brought before Satish. Kiran was present too. Satish asked straight
out, ‘Where have you put the inkstand that you stole from me? Give it
back!’
Nilkanta had often received beatings from Sharat for various offences
and also for no offences, and had borne them all stoically. But when the
theft of the inkstand was ascribed to him in front of Kiran, his large eyes
burnt like fire, his chest heaved and choked his throat, and if Satish had
said one more word the boy would have pounced like a furious kitten
and gouged him with all ten fingernails.
Kiran called him into the next room and asked him in kind, soft tones,
‘Nilu, if you have that inkstand, give it me quietly and no one will say
anything to you.’ Heavy tears welled from his eyes: he covered his face
with his hands and wept. Kiran came out of the room and said, ‘Nilkanta
did not steal your inkstand.’
Sharat and Satish both insisted, ‘No one but him could have stolen it.’
‘It wasn’t him,’ said Kiran firmly.
Sharat wanted to fetch Nilkanta to interrogate him, but Kiran said,
‘No. I forbid you to ask him anything about the theft.’
‘We should search his room and his box,’ said Satish.
‘If you do that,’ said Kiran, ‘I shall have nothing more to do with you.
You shouldn’t cast suspicion on the innocent.’
As she spoke, tears collected in her eyelids. The appeal of those tears

in her sad eyes ensured that no further action was taken against
Nilkanta. But the unjust treatment of an innocent orphan boy sent a
surge of sympathy through Kiran’s heart. That evening she entered
Nilkanta’s room with a fine matching dhoti and chadar, two shirts, a pair
of new shoes and a ten-rupee note. Her plan was to put these loving gifts
inside his box without telling him. The tin box too had been given by
her. Taking her bunch of keys from the end of her sari, she quietly
opened the box. But she couldn’t fit her presents into it. Cotton-reels,
bamboo-twigs, polished shells for cutting green mangoes, the bottoms of
broken glasses, and various similar articles were heaped inside it. She
decided that if she carefully rearranged these things, everything would
go in. She began to empty the box. First of all the cotton-reels, spinningtops and knives came out; then some clean and dirty clothes, and then,
right at the bottom, Satish’s precious swan inkstand.
Amazed and flushed, Kiran sat pondering for a long time with the
inkstand in her hand. When Nilkanta came into the room from behind
her, she never even noticed. He saw everything: realized that Kiran had
herself come like a thief to confirm his thieving, and that he had been
caught. But how could he explain that he had not stolen like a common
thief out of greed, that he’d done it in retaliation, that he’d meant to
throw the thing into the river, and only in a moment of weakness had he
not thrown it away but had buried it in his box? He was not a thief, he
was not a thief! But then what was he? How could he say what he was?
He had stolen something but he was not a thief! The fact that Kiran had
suspected him – it was the cruel injustice of this that he would never be
able to explain, never be able to bear.
With a long sigh, Kiran put the inkstand back into the box. Like a thief
herself, she pressed the dirty clothes on top of it, then those boyish
things – cotton-reels, twigs, spinning-tops, shells, pieces of glass; then
she arranged her presents and the ten-rupee note.
The next day there was no sign of the Brahmin boy. The villagers said
they had not seen him; the police said he was missing. ‘We must look at
his box now,’ said Sharat.
‘Not on any account,’ said Kiran adamantly.
Later, she fetched the box into her own room, took out the inkstand
and secretly threw it into the Ganges.

Sharat and his family went home; the house and garden lay empty.
Only Nilkanta’s village dog remained. It wandered along by the river,
forgetting to eat, searching, searching and howling.

Elder Sister
I
‘If you want my opinion,’ said Shashi’s neighbour Tara after describing
in detail how one of the husbands in the village ill-treated his wife,
‘husbands like that should have burning coals shoved down their
throats.’
Shashi, wife of Jaygopal, was appalled by such a remark. It did not do
credit to a wife to wish anything other than the fire of a cheroot to be in
a husband’s mouth, whatever the circumstances. But when she expressed
her dismay, the hard-hearted Tara said with doubled venom, ‘Better to
be widowed in seven successive lives than have a husband like that.’ And
ending the conversation there, she went on her way.
‘I can’t imagine any fault in a husband so bad that one could feel such
dreadful things about him,’ said Shashi to herself. As she reflected on
this, her soft heart swelled with tender feelings towards her own absent
husband. She stretched her arms over the part of the bed where he
normally slept, kissed the vacant pillow, sensed a whiff of her husband’s
hair, and then, closing the door, took from a wooden box an almost
forgotten photograph of him and some of his letters. She sat alone in her
room through the still afternoon, musing and reflecting, tearfully pining
for him.
Shashikala and Jaygopal were not recently married. They had been
married as children, and now they had children of their own. They had
been together for a long time, and lived normally and straightforwardly.
There had never been signs of exceptional passion between them. But
when, after nearly sixteen years in which they had never been separated,
her husband’s work had suddenly taken him away, Shashi felt a much
more intense love for him. His absence pulled at her heart, tightening
the knot of love; feelings whose existence she had never previously
known tugged and twinged within her. So despite her years, and despite
being a wife and mother, Shashi sat on her lonely bed, daydreaming like

a fresh young bride. The love that had, unbeknown to her, flowed
through her life like a river, suddenly woke her with its murmur: she
began to see a succession of golden cities and flowering arbours along its
banks, whose promise of pleasure was now beyond her reach, a thing of
the past. She said to herself, ‘When I get my husband back I shall never
again let life be dull, or the spring fruitless.’ Why had she argued so
often with her husband over footling matters? Now, in her intensity of
love, she resolved never to be impatient again, never to oppose his
wishes or commands. She would meekly and lovingly accept his
activities whether good or bad, because nothing was more precious or
divine than a husband.
For many years Shashikala had been her parents’ beloved only child.
So although Jaygopal earned little, he was not anxious about the future.
He would inherit from his father-in-law Kaliprasanna enough to live like
a prince, in village terms. But very unexpectedly, at an advanced age,
Shashikala’s parents produced a son. Truth to tell, Shashi was rather
scandalized that her parents should have done something so
inappropriate to their years; and Jaygopal was not too happy either.
Her parents’ love for this child of their old age became extreme.
Unknowingly, this new-born, suckling, sleepy brother-in-law robbed
Jaygopal of his hopes, seized them in his tiny fists. Hence this job in an
Assam tea-garden. Everyone had urged him to look for work nearer
home, but whether out of grudge or from the notion that he would
quickly rise high there, Jaygopal listened to no one. Leaving Shashi and
their children in her father’s house, he went off to Assam. It was the first
time he had ever been away from her.
Shashikala was very angry with her baby brother for causing this. A
grievance that cannot be expressed openly always festers. He just sucked
at the breast comfortably and shut his eyes in sleep, but his big sister
resented having to warm his milk or cool his rice, making her own son
late for school. Her resentment upset the whole household.
Within a short time the boy’s mother was dead. Before she died she
entrusted her baby son to her daughter’s care.
It was not long before the motherless infant conquered his sister’s
heart. He would leap with a shriek on to her lap and greedily gobble her
face and eyes and nose with his toothless little mouth; he would grab her

hair in his fist and refuse to let go; he would wake before dawn, snuggle
close, tickle her gently and babble; whatever he did she was helpless!
Soon he was calling her ‘Jiji’ and ‘Jijimā’,1 getting up to mischief when
she worked or rested, eating what was forbidden, going where he was
forbidden – she gave in totally to this wilful little scallywag. Because he
had no mother, his hold on her was all the greater.

II
The boy’s name was Nilmani. When he was two years old, his father fell
seriously ill. A letter was sent to Jaygopal, telling him to come at once.
With great difficulty Jaygopal managed to get leave: when he arrived,
Kaliprasanna was dying.
Before he died, he entrusted his little son to the guardianship of
Jaygopal and left a quarter of his estate to his daughter. Jaygopal
therefore had to resign from his job and return to manage the estate.
Husband and wife were reunited after a long time. If a material thing
gets broken it can be dovetailed together again; but there are no clean
edges along which two people who have been apart for a long time can
be stuck together. This is because the mind is a living substance,
changing and ripening with every moment. For Shashi, to be reunited
was a new emotional experience. It was as if she were marrying her
husband again. The staleness that the habits of a long-standing marriage
bring about had been dispelled by absence; she felt she was receiving her
husband back more fully than before. She promised herself: ‘Whatever
the future may bring, however long I live, I shall never let this bright
new love for my husband grow dim.’
But Jaygopal’s feelings at the reunion were different. When they had
lived together before, all his interests and habits had been bound up
with Shashi: she had grown to be a permanent feature in his life – if ever
he was without her, gaps were made in his daily routine. So when he
first went away, Jaygopal found himself at a loss. But gradually the gaps
were patched over with new routines. Not only that. Formerly, his life
had been leisurely and serene; but now, over the last two years, he had
become so ambitious to improve his circumstances that he thought of

little else. Compared to this, his old way of life seemed thin as a shadow.
In women, the greatest changes are worked by love; in men, by
ambition.
Jaygopal did not get his wife back after two years exactly as she had
been before. His little brother-in-law had added a new dimension to her
life – one which was completely unknown to him, one in which he had
no part. His wife tried to get him to share her love for the boy, but I
cannot say she was successful. She would bring Nilmani in her arms and
smilingly hold him up to her husband: Nilmani would cling to her, bury
his face in her shoulder, would not acknowledge any kinship with him.
She wanted her little brother to show Jaygopal his tricks – but Jaygopal
was not very interested, and the boy was not keen either. Jaygopal could
not for the life of him understand why this skinny, large-headed, solemn,
dark-complexioned child deserved such affection.
Women are never slow to perceive real feelings. Shashi soon saw that
Jaygopal was not enamoured of Nilmani. She then became very
protective: doing her utmost to keep him away from her husband’s
withering stare. The child became her secret treasure, the object of her
love alone. Everyone knows that the more love is secretive, the more it
grows.
When Nilmani cried, Jaygopal was extremely irritated, so Shashi
would clasp him to her breast trying with all the force of her embrace to
soothe him. And when her husband’s sleep was disturbed by Nilmani’s
crying, and he shouted out in fury, full of aggression towards him,
Shashi herself felt guilty and embarrassed. She swept him out of earshot,
and soothed him to sleep again with meek and adoring repetitions of
‘My treasure, my jewel, my precious’.
Quarrels between children can flare up for various reasons. Formerly
on such occasions Shashi would punish her own children, taking her
brother’s part because he had no mother. But now a change of judge had
brought about a change in the penal code. Nilmani had to suffer harsh
punishments, unfair and undeserved. The injustice of it cut his sister to
the quick: she would take her disgraced little brother to her room, give
him sweets and toys, caress him and kiss him, do everything she could to
heal the child’s wounded feelings.
The result was this: the more Shashi doted on Nilmani the more

Jaygopal resented him, and the more dislike Jaygopal showed towards
Nilmani the more Shashi adored him. Jaygopal never actually ill-treated
his wife, and Shashi continued to serve him with silent, meek devotion;
it was only Nilmani who was a concealed but ever-growing bone of
contention between them. Silent animosity and jealousy of this kind is
harder to bear than open conflict.

III
Nilmani’s head was out of proportion to his body. It was as if the Creator
had blown a bubble on the end of a stick. Doctors were afraid sometimes
that the boy would be as fragile and short-lived as a bubble. It took him
a long time to learn to talk and walk. His mournful, solemn face made
one think that his parents had piled their elderly worries on to this little
child’s head. But his big sister’s careful nurturing got him through the
dangerous years, and he reached the age of six.
In the month of Kārtik, Shashi dressed Nilmani up as a little
gentleman in a red-bordered dhoti and performed the bhāiphõtā
ceremony, marking his forehead with sandal-paste. Tara – the bluntspeaking neighbour mentioned earlier – appeared then, and picked a
quarrel with Shashi. ‘What good will the paste do,’ she said, ‘when in
fact you’ve been secretly ruining him?’
Shashi was thunderstruck. The rumour was – so Tara told her – that
she and her husband had defaulted on the payment of duty on Nilmani’s
estate, so that they could buy it back at auction in the name of
Jaygopal’s cousin. Shashi cursed those who put about such slanders: they
deserved to catch leprosy.
She then went tearfully to her husband and told him what people
were saying. ‘You can’t trust anyone these days,’ said Jaygopal. ‘Upen is
my cousin: I was entirely happy to leave the management of Nilmani’s
property to him. I had no idea he had secretly defaulted on payment of
duty, and bought the estate at Hasilpur himself.’
‘Aren’t you going to sue him?’ said Shashi in amazement.
‘How can I sue my cousin?’ said Jaygopal. ‘And there’d be no point –
it would just be a waste of money.’

To trust her husband’s word was Shashi’s highest duty, but she had no
faith in him now. Her happy family, her loving home, now seemed
monstrously ugly. What had been a haven was suddenly a cruel trap,
squeezing both her and her brother on all sides. How could she, a
woman, on her own, protect the hapless Nilmani? What refuge was
there? The more she thought, the more her heart filled with horror, and
the more it filled with love for her little brother in his plight. She
wondered if there was a way in which she could appeal to the GovernorGeneral: maybe she could even write to the Queen of England to restore
her brother’s inheritance. The Queen would never have allowed the
Hasilpur estate – which brought in 758 rupees a year for Nilmani – to be
sold. She went on thinking about how she would appeal to the Queen to
secure full restitution from her husband’s cousin; but suddenly now
Nilmani developed a fever, and started to have convulsions.
Jaygopal called the local Indian doctor. When Shashi begged him to
call a better doctor he said, ‘Why, is Matilal such a bad one?’
Shashi fell at his feet, implored him. ‘All right,’ said Jaygopal, ‘I’ll
bring the doctor from town.’
Shashi clasped Nilmani to her, lay down clutching him to her breast.
Nilmani too never took his eyes off her; held on to her lest she should
slip away while he was not looking. Even when he fell asleep, he
continued to grasp her sari.
In the evening, after a whole day of this, Jaygopal returned and said,
‘I couldn’t get the town doctor – he’s gone to see a patient out of town
somewhere. I’ve got to leave today to attend a court-case. I’ve told
Matilal to visit the patient regularly.’
That night Nilmani began to rave in his sleep. In the morning Shashi,
without pausing to consider the matter, boarded a boat with her sick
brother and travelled all the way to the doctor’s house. The doctor was
at home – he had not left to go anywhere. Seeing that Shashi was of
good family, he arranged accommodation for her, with an elderly widow
in attendance, and started to treat the boy.
The next day Jaygopal arrived. Blazing with anger, he ordered his
wife to return with him at once. ‘Wild horses couldn’t drag me back,’ she
said. ‘You and your people want to kill Nilmani: he has no mother, no
father, no one but me. I’ll protect him.’

‘Then stay here,’ roared Jaygopal, ‘and never set foot in my house
again.’
‘Your house!’ said Shashi, incensed too. ‘It’s my brother’s house!’
‘We’ll see about that,’ said Jaygopal.
For a few days, local people raised an uproar about these events. The
neighbour Tara said, ‘If a woman wants to quarrel with her husband, she
should do it comfortably at home. There’s no need to move out. After all,
a husband is a husband!’
By spending all the money she had with her, and by selling her
ornaments, Shashi managed to save her brother from death. She then
heard that the large piece of land her family owned at Dvari village, on
which their house stood, and which, all told, brought in an annual
income of nearly 1,500 rupees, had been appropriated by Jaygopal in his
own name and in collusion with the zamindar. The property now
belonged to him, not to her brother.
When he had got over his illness and was up again, Nilmani said
piteously, ‘Didi, let’s go home.’ He missed his playmates – Shashi’s own
children. ‘Please, Didi, let’s go home,’ he said, over and over again. His
sister could only weep and say, ‘Where is our home now?’ But there was
no point in weeping. Nilmani had no one in the world now but his big
sister. When this had sunk in, Shashi dried her eyes and went to see the
wife of Tarini Babu, the Deputy Magistrate.
The Deputy Magistrate knew Jaygopal. He was annoyed that a wife of
good family should want to leave her home and quarrel with her
husband over property. Soothing her down, he wrote urgently to
Jaygopal – who came at once, forced his wife and brother-in-law on to a
boat and took them home.
For the second time, husband and wife were reunited after a
separation. Fated to be united!
Nilmani was delighted to be back playing with his friends. It broke
Shashi’s heart to see his carefree happiness.

IV

In the winter the English District Magistrate went out on tour and
pitched his tent in the village, hoping to do some hunting there. Nilmani
met the Magistrate on a village-path. The other boys made scarce, giving
him as wide a berth as Chanakya recommends for animals with sharp
nails, teeth or horns. But the solemn Nilmani stayed to examine the
sāheb with calm curiosity.
‘Do you go to school?’ asked the Magistrate pleasantly.
The boy silently nodded, ‘Yes.’
‘What texts are you reading?’ asked the sāheb.
Not understanding the meaning of the word ‘text’, Nilmani went on
staring at the Magistrate. Later, he enthusiastically described this
meeting with the Magistrate to his sister.
That afternoon Jaygopal dressed himself up in chapkan, pantaloons
and turban, and went to pay his respects to the honourable Magistrate.
Petitioners, defendants, messengers and constables crowded round. To
escape the heat, the sāheb had emerged from his tent and was sitting at a
camp-table in the shade outside. Offering Jaygopal a stool he questioned
him about local affairs. Jaygopal swelled with pride to be given this
privileged position in front of the villagers, and thought, ‘If only the
Chakrabartis and Nandis could see me now!’
It was then that a veiled woman appeared, bringing Nilmani with her,
and stood before the Magistrate. ‘Sāheb,’ she said, ‘I entrust this
orphaned little brother of mine to you: please look after him.’
Seeing for the second time this serious, large-headed little boy, with a
woman who was clearly of good family, the sāheb stood up and said,
‘Come into the tent.’
‘I shall say right here what I have to say,’ said the woman. Jaygopal
went pale and began to fidget. The curious villagers closed in avidly; but
withdrew when the sāheb raised his cane.
Holding her brother’s hand Shashi told his whole story from beginning
to end. From time to time Jaygopal tried to interrupt, but the Magistrate,
flushed with anger, snapped at him to shut up and, pointing with his
cane, directed him to stand up from his stool. Jaygopal stood in silence,
inwardly fuming at Shashi. Nilmani pressed against his sister and
listened open-mouthed.

When Shashi had finished her account the Magistrate asked Jaygopal
some questions, and after hearing his replies fell silent. Then, addressing
Shashi, he said, ‘My dear, although I can’t hear this case myself, you can
rest assured that I shall do what needs to be done. You can return home
with your brother without fear.’
‘So long as he cannot get back the house which is his by rights,’ said
Shashi, ‘I shall not dare to take him there. Only if you keep Nilmani
yourself will he be safe.’
‘Where will you go?’ asked the sāheb.
‘I shall return to my husband’s house. I have nothing to fear.’
With a slight smile, the sāheb gave in. He agreed to take away this
skinny, dark, serious, calm, gentle, amulet-wearing Bengali boy.
As Shashi said goodbye, the boy clung to her sari. ‘Don’t worry, little
chap,’ said the sāheb. ‘Come with me.’
With tears streaming behind her veil, Shashi said, ‘Darling brother, go
now – you’ll see your Didi again.’ Then she embraced him, stroked his
head and back, somehow extricated the end of her sari from his grasp
and swiftly walked away. The sāheb put his left arm round Nilmani, but
he cried out, ‘Didi, Didi!’ Shashi turned once and waved at him with her
right hand, trying to send him silent consolation. Then, heart-broken,
she continued on her way.
Once again husband and wife were reunited in their long-familiar
home. Fated to be united! But this reunion did not last long. For not long
afterwards the villagers heard one morning that Shashi had been smitten
with cholera during the night and had been cremated that very night. No
one made any comment on this. The neighbour Tara would sometimes
shout out what she thought, but people told her to shut up.
When she said goodbye to her brother, Shashi said that he would see
her again. I do not know if that promise has been fulfilled.

Fury Appeased
I
Gopinath Shil’s wife Giribala lived on the top floor of Ramanath Shil’s
three-storey house. There were tubs of bel-flowers and roses outside the
southern door of her bedroom. The roof had a high parapet around it,
with spaces between the bricks so that one could look at the view. The
bedroom was hung with engravings of foreign ladies in various states of
dress and undress; but the reflection of the sixteen-year-old Giribala in
the large mirror opposite the door was not inferior to any of the pictures
on the wall.
Giribala’s beauty was like a sudden ray of light, a surprise, an
awakening, a shock. It could be quite overwhelming. One felt on seeing
her, ‘I was not prepared for this. She is absolutely different from what I
see around me all the time.’ And she herself was thrilled by her own
beauty. Her body seemed brimful of youth, like foaming wine in a
beaker – overflowing in her dress and ornaments, movements, gestures,
the tilt of her neck, the dance of her steps, the jingle of her bracelets and
anklets, her laugh, her sharp retorts, her brilliant glances.
She was drunk with the wine of her beauty. She was often seen
restlessly pacing on her roof, draped in brightly coloured clothes: as if
she wished to dance with every limb to an unexpressed tune in her
mind. She had a kind of joy, driving and hurling her body into
movement; she seemed to receive from the various facets of her beauty a
strange pulsation, a throbbing in her blood. She would tear a leaf off a
plant, raise it high and release it on the breeze: the graceful curve of her
arm soared towards the clouds like an unseen bird released from a cage,
while her bangles tinkled and her sari slipped from her shoulder. Or else
she would pick up a clod from a tub and pointlessly scatter it about; or
standing on tiptoe glance through the spaces in the wall at the great
world beyond; or spin her sari-end around her, so that the keys that
were tied to it jingled. Maybe she would go to the mirror, unbind her

hair and whimsically plait it again – tying the hair at the root with a
string, holding the end of the string in her jasmine-white teeth, and
lifting her arms behind her head to coil the plaits up tightly. With
nothing to do next, she would spread herself out on the soft bed, like
moonlight shining through leaves.
She had no children; nor in this wealthy home did she have any
housework. Alone every day like this, it was becoming impossible for her
to contain herself. She had a husband, but he was outside her control. It
had somehow escaped his notice that she had grown out of her
childhood so fully.
She had, on the contrary, received his affection when she was a child.
He had played truant from school, evaded his dozing guardians, to come
and flirt with his girlish young bride. Even though they lived in the same
house, he wrote her letters on fancy notepaper, showing them proudly to
his schoolfriends. His feelings were amorous enough to be ruffled by
clashes with his wife over small or imaginary matters.
Since then, his father had died and Gopinath had himself become
master of the house. Unseasoned planks are soon attacked by
woodworm. Gopinath had gained independence early: there were many
pests to fasten themselves on to him. His visits to the inner part of the
house became rarer as he roved further and further afield.
To be a leader is exciting; society can be a potent drug. The desire
that Napoleon had to extend his influence over men and history can be
felt on a smaller scale in the drawing-room. It is marvellously exciting to
create and bind together with crude wit an admiring circle of cronies, to
lord it over them and win their applause. Many are willing to embrace
debt and scandal and ruin to obtain this.
Gopinath found it thrilling to be a leader. Each day, new feats of wit
brought him ever greater glory. In the eyes of his followers, his repartee
was unparalleled. Blinded by vanity and excitement to all other duties
and feelings, he abandoned himself completely to a ceaseless social
whirl.
Meanwhile Giribala, imperiously beautiful, ruled a realm without
subjects from her bedroom’s desolate throne. She knew that God had
given her a sceptre; she knew she could conquer with a glance the vast
world she could see through the gaps in the parapet – yet no one in the

world was hers.
She had a pert and witty servant called Sudhamukhi – Sudho for short
– who could sing, dance, make up verses, celebrate Giribala’s beauty and
rail that it was wasted on so boorish a husband. Giribala leant on her
utterly. She would wallow in Sudho’s praise of her face, figure and
complexion; sometimes she demurred, took pleasure in rebuking her for
flattery – but when Sudho swore by her opinion, Giribala easily believed
her. When Sudho sang, ‘I have signed myself in bondage at your feet’,
Giribala took this as a hymn to her own flawless, lac-painted feet, and
imagined a lover rolling before them. But alas, despite the victorious
jingle of her anklets as she strode to and fro on her empty roof, no lover
came to enslave himself to those feet.
Gopinath, however, was enslaved to Labanga, who acted at the
theatre. She was wonderful at swooning on stage, and whenever she
broke into artificial tears, nasally sobbing ‘Lord of my life, Lord of my
soul’, the audience in their long stockings and waistcoats worn over
dhotis would roar, ‘Excellent, excellent.’1
Giribala had often heard descriptions of Labanga’s extraordinary
talent from her husband (he still came to her occasionally). She did not
know the full extent of his infatuation, but she felt jealous all the same.
She could not bear to think that another woman had charms and
accomplishments which she lacked. She frequently asked, with jealous
curiosity, to be taken to the theatre; but her husband refused.
Finally one day she gave Sudho some money and sent her there. When
she came back, she spoke of the actresses with disgust, frowning,
screwing up her nose. Really, in God’s name, they should be beaten on
the brow with a broomstick, and men who fell for their ugly figures and
phoney movements deserved the same treatment! This reassured
Giribala a little. But with her husband virtually cut off from her now, her
doubts returned. She voiced them to Sudho, who swore on her life that
Labanga was as ugly as a burnt stick dressed in rags. Giribala, unable to
see what her husband saw in the actress, smarted with this blow to her
pride.2
In the end one evening she secretly went to the theatre with Sudho.
Forbidden acts are thrilling! The soft throbbing in her arteries made the
brightly lit, crowded stage – filled with music, surrounded by spectators

– all the more wondrous to behold. Instead of her lonely, cheerless room,
here was a festive world, gorgeous, beautiful. It was like a dream.
The musical play ‘Fury Appeased’1 was being performed that day. The
warning bell rang, the band stopped playing, the eager spectators fell
silent for a moment, the footlights brightened, the curtain rose, a troupe
of girls beautifully dressed as the milkmaids of Vraj danced to musical
accompaniment, the theatre resounded with bursts of clapping and roars
of approval from the audience – and Giribala’s youthful blood surged.
The rhythm of the music, the lights, the brilliant costumes and the bursts
of applause made her forget for a moment her whole domestic world.
She had found a place of beautiful, unfettered liberty.
Sudho edged up to her at intervals and whispered nervously,
‘Bauthākrun, it’s time to go home. If the Master finds out, we’ll be done
for!’ Giribala took no notice. Nothing frightened her now.
The performance neared its climax. Radha was in an almighty huff;
Krishna was thrashing hopelessly – his moans and appeals were getting
him nowhere. Giribala seethed with outrage, felt as exultant as Radha
herself at Krishna’s discomfiture. No one ever assailed her like this –
neglected, deserted wife that she was; but how thrilling it was to realize
that she too could make a lover groan! She had heard that beauty could
be ruthless, had guessed how it might be so: now, in the light and music
of the stage, she saw its power in action. It set her brain on fire.
At last the curtain fell, the gas lights dimmed, the audience started to
leave; Giribala sat in a trance. She had no thought of leaving the theatre
to return home. The performance would surely go on for ever! The
curtain would rise again, Krishna would be crushed by Radha; nothing
else was conceivable. ‘Bauthākrun,’ said Sudho, ‘what are you doing?
Come on! They’re turning out the lights!’
Late that night Giribala returned to her room. A lamp flickered in a
corner; there was not a soul or a sound – just an old mosquito-net
stirring in the breeze above the empty bed. Life seemed horribly mean
and trivial. Where was that brightly lit musical realm, where she could
reign at the world’s centre, dispensing her greatness, where she would
no longer be merely an unknown, unloved, insignificant, ordinary
woman.
From now on she went to the theatre each week. Gradually the

rapture of her first visit faded: she could now detect the make-up of the
actors and actresses’ faces, the lack of real beauty, the falseness of the
acting; but she remained addicted to it. Like a warrior thrilling to the
sound of martial music, her heart leapt each time the curtain went up.
For an Empress of Beauty, what throne was more magical than this high,
enchanting stage, separate from the world, lettered in gold, adorned
with scene-paintings, strung with a fabulous web of music and poetry,
pressed by enraptured spectators, pregnant with off-stage mysteries,
revealed to all by garlands of brilliant lights?
On the night that she first saw her husband at the theatre, loudly
appreciating one of the actresses, how she despised him! She decided
bitterly that if the day came when her husband, lured by her beauty,
were to fall at her feet like a scorched insect, enabling her to walk away
grandly, her very toenails shining with contempt, only then would her
wasted beauty and youth be avenged! But how could such a day come?
She hardly saw him now. She had no idea of his movements, where he
went to with his gang of followers, driving them on like dust before a
storm.
On a night of full moon in Caitra, Giribala, dressed in the light-orange
colours of the spring, sat on her roof, the end of her sari floating in the
breeze. Though her husband never came to her, Giribala had not given
up her constant changes of clothes and ornaments. Jewels created a
stunning effect when she wore them – a gleaming, tinkling aura around
her. Today she wore armlets, a necklace of rubies and pearls, and a
sapphire ring on her left little finger. Sudho sat by her and sometimes
stroked her soft, perfect lotus-pink feet, saying with artless eagerness, ‘O
Bauṭhākrun, if I were a man I would clasp these feet to my breast and
die!’ Giribala laughed haughtily and said, ‘You would die before that, for
I’d kick you away! Stop blabbering. Sing me that song.’ On the quiet and
moonlit roof-top, Sudho sang:
I have signed myself in bondage at your feet.
Let all in Vrindavan witness it!

It was ten o’clock at night. Everyone had finished their dinner and gone
to bed. Suddenly Gopinath appeared, smeared with pomatum, silk scarf
flowing; and Sudho, mightily flustered, hastily pulled down her veil and

fled.
‘My day has come,’ thought Giribala to herself. She did not look up.
She sat as still as Radha, proud and dignified. But the curtain did not
rise, Krishna did not roll at her feet in his head-dress of peacock feathers,
no one burst out singing, ‘Why darken the moon by hiding your face?’ In
a gruff and tuneless voice, Gopinath said, ‘The key please.’
On a moonlit spring night like this, after so long a separation, that
these should be his first words! Was all that was written in poems, plays
and novels utterly false? On the stage, the lover would have come with a
song and fallen at his lady-love’s feet; her husband as a member of the
audience would have melted at the scene – but here he was on a roof on
a spring night, saying to his matchless young wife, ‘The key please.’ No
music, no love, no magic, no sweetness – it was so utterly banal!
The breeze sighed heavily now – pained, so it seemed, by this insult to
all the world’s poetry. Fragrance spread across the roof from the tubs of
bel-flowers; Giribala’s unbound tresses blew across her face and eyes; her
scented spring-coloured sari fluttered uneasily. She swallowed her pride
and stood up. Taking her husband’s hand, she said, ‘Come into the
bedroom – I’ll give you the key.’ Today her crying would make him cry,
her lonely fantasies would be fulfilled, her divine weapons would be used
and would triumph! She was sure. ‘I haven’t got long to wait,’ said
Gopinath. ‘Give me the key.’
‘I’ll give you the key and everything it locks,’ said Giribala. ‘But
tonight I shan’t let you go out.’
‘That’s impossible,’ said Gopinath. ‘I’ve got to go.’
‘Then I shan’t give you the key,’ said Giribala.
‘You’ll give it or else!’ said Gopinath. ‘Just you try not to give it to
me.’ He noticed then that there were no keys tied to the end of her sari.
He went into the bedroom, pulled open the dressing-table drawer: no
keys there either. He broke open her hairdressing box, found collyrium,
vermilion, hair-string and other things – but no key. He rumpled the
bedding, upturned the mattress, smashed the cupboard, ransacked the
whole room.
Giribala stood in silence, gripping the door and looking out at the
roof. Seething with rage and frustration, Gopinath shouted, ‘I’m telling

you to give me the key, or there’ll be trouble.’ She made no reply. He
then grabbed hold of her, wrenched off her armlets, her necklace and
rings, kicked her, and left.
No one in the house woke up; no one near by knew anything; the
moonlit night remained as still as ever; peace seemed to reign unbroken.
But if the pounding in Giribala’s heart could have been heard outside,
the serene and moonlit Caitra night would have been split through and
through with a fierce howl of agony. Such total silence; such fearful
heart-break!
All nights end, even this. Giribala could not reveal – even to Sudho –
her shame and defeat. She thought of killing herself, of tearing to shreds
her incomparable beauty, to avenge her loveless state. But she realized
that nothing would be gained by that: the world would remain
unaffected, no one would feel the loss. There was no pleasure in living,
but no consolation in dying.
‘I shall go back to my parents,’ said Giribala. Her parents’ house was a
long way from Calcutta. Everyone told her not to go, but she listened to
no one and took no one with her. And meanwhile Gopinath too went off
on a boat-trip with his cronies – no one knew where.

II
Gopinath attended nearly every performance at the Gandharva Theatre.
Labanga was playing the title-role in Manorama; and Gopinath and his
followers sat in the front row and cheered and threw pouches of money
on to the stage. The noise they made was sometimes very annoying to
the rest of the audience. But the theatre-managers never had the courage
to stop them.
One day Gopinath, rather the worse for drink, got into the Green
Room and caused complete uproar. He somehow thought he had been
slighted by one of the actresses, and was now assaulting her. The whole
theatre was aroused by the actress’s screams and Gopinath’s stream of
abuse. This was more than the managers could stand. The police were
called to throw him out.
Gopinath was determined to get his own back for this insult. A month

before the pūjā-holiday, the managers announced – with great publicity
– further performances of Manorama. Calcutta was festooned with
playbills; it was as if the goddess of the city was wearing a nāmābali with
the author’s name inscribed. But meanwhile Labanga, the leading actress
in the play, disappeared, whisked away on a boat-trip by Gopinath.
The theatre-managers were completely flummoxed. They waited for
some days, but eventually had to rehearse a new actress in the role of
Manorama, delaying the opening night. Not that this did much harm.
The theatre was full to bursting. Hundreds of people had to be turned
away at the door. The critics were ecstatic – and news of this reached
Gopinath, far away though he was. He could not keep away any longer.
Consumed with curiosity, he returned to Calcutta to see the play.
In the first half, the curtain rose on Manorama in her in-laws’ house,
meanly dressed like a servant, going about her housework in furtive,
cowed, timid fashion, saying nothing and hiding her face. In the second,
her greedy husband had sent her back to her parents’ house so that he
could marry a millionaire’s daughter. On examining his new bride after
the wedding, he found she was Manorama again, this time dressed not as
a servant but as a princess: her incomparable beauty, decked in jewels
and finery, shone all around. In childhood she had been stolen from her
rich parents’ home and brought up in poverty. Many years later, her
father had found her again, and brought her back to his house. Now,
with new lavishness, she was married to her husband for the second
time. A post-wedding ‘Fury Appeased’ scene now began.
But all hell had broken loose in the audience. While Manorama’s face
had been hidden by a servant’s dirty veil, Gopinath had sat quietly. But
when she stood up in the bridal chamber, in all her beauty, unveiled,
dressed in red, glittering with jewels, inclining her head with
indescribable hauteur, directing at all, but especially at Gopinath, a
fiercely contemptuous stare, sharp as lightning, so that all the hearts of
the audience leapt and the whole theatre rocked with a barrage of
applause: it was then that Gopinath jumped up and yelled, ‘Giribala,
Giribala!’ He ran and tried to leap on to the stage – but the musicians
restrained him.
Outraged by this interruption to their pleasure, the audience shouted
in English and Bengali, ‘Get him out, throw him out.’

Choking like a madman, Gopinath screamed, ‘I’ll kill her, I’ll kill her.’
The police came and ragged him from the theatre. All of Calcutta
continued to feast their eyes on Giribala’s performance; all except for
Gopinath.

hākurdā
I
The zamindars of Nayanjor were at one time regarded as true gentlemen
– ‘Babus’ – a title that in those days was not at all easy to achieve.
Today, no one can be called ‘Raja’ or ‘Raybahadur’ without the ritual of
dances, dinners, horse-races, flattery and connections; likewise in those
days great efforts were needed to win from the public the name of
‘Babu’.
The ‘Babus’ of Nayanjor used to tear off the borders of their Dhaka
muslins before they wore them, because the borders were too coarse for
their aristocratic skins; they spent lakhs of rupees on marrying their pet
kittens; and on one particular festive occasion they were said to have
turned night into day not only by the number of lights but by showering
real silver tinsel to simulate the sun’s rays. Such grandeur could
obviously not be handed down intact to their heirs. Like oil in a multiwicked lamp, it was soon burnt away.
Our friend Kailaschandra Raychaudhuri was a burnt-out scion of the
famous Nayanjor Babus. At his birth, the lamp was nearly out of oil;
with his father’s death, it spluttered in a final show of funereal excess
and then went out completely. Assets were sold to pay off debts; the
remainder was far too little to keep up the name of the family. So Kailas
Babu left Nayanjor and came with his son to Calcutta; but before long
his son too abandoned a faded existence in this world for the world
beyond, leaving an only daughter.
We were neighbours of Kailas Babu. Our own history was entirely
different. My father had earned his wealth through his own efforts,
counting every paisa, economizing even in the length of his dhoti,1 and
never aspiring to be a ‘Babu’. As his only son, I was grateful to him. I
was proud to have acquired some education, to have enough means to
hold my head high without too much effort. It’s better to inherit
Company Bonds in a small iron box than an empty store of ancestral

glories.
Probably this is why I was so irritated when Kailas Babu tried to draw
hefty cheques on the failed bank of his ancestry! I felt that he somehow
despised my father for earning his own money. It made me furious –
who was he to despise us? A man who had sacrificed a lot, resisted many
temptations, had no desire to be famous; who had through effort and
care, intelligence and skill beaten all obstacles, seizing every chance to
make his pile, building it with his own hands: he was not to be despised
because he didn’t wear his dhoti below his knees!
I was young then, this was why I reacted like this, fumed like this.
Now I’m older, and it doesn’t bother me any more. I’m well off; I lack for
nothing. If a man who has nothing gets pleasure from sneering, it doesn’t
cost me a penny, and maybe the poor fellow gets some consolation from
it.
It was striking that no one found Kailas Babu irritating except me, for
he had a rare sort of innocence. He involved himself totally in the
feelings and activities of his neighbours. He had smiles for them all, from
the youngest to the eldest; he took pleasure in inquiring kindly about
everyone, whoever they were and wherever they were. At every
encounter he would launch into a stream of questions: ‘How are you?
How is Shashi? Is your father well? I hear that Madhu’s boy has fever –
is he better now? I haven’t seen Haricharan Babu for a long time now –
has he been ill? How about Rakhal? Is everyone at home well?’ – and so
on.
He was always beautifully dressed. He didn’t own many clothes, but
he daily aired them in the sun: his waistcoat, chadar and shirt – together
with his pillowcase, mat and ancient bedspread – were brushed and
hung on a line, then folded and placed neatly on the ālnā. He seemed
when one saw him to be always out in his Sunday best. His room,
though poorly furnished, was spotless; he appeared to be better off than
he was. For lack of servants, he would shut the door of his room and
neatly crimp his dhoti himself, and carefully press his chadar and shirtsleeves. He had lost his family’s huge estates, but had managed to keep
from the jaws of poverty a valuable rose-water spray, a pomatum-pot, a
gold saucer, a silver hookah, an expensive shawl, an old-fashioned pair
of pyjamas, and a turban. If occasion arose, he would get these out and

revive the glory and world-wide fame of the Babus of Nayanjor.
Gentle and natural though he was, he could sometimes be conceited –
but only out of loyalty to his ancestors. People indulged this: they found
it rather charming. They called him ‘ hākurdā’ – Grandfather – and
constantly gathered at his house. But lest the cost of tobacco became too
much for his slender means, someone would bring some along and say, ‘
hākurdā, have a taste of this – it’s beautiful.’ hākurdā would take a
few puffs and say, ‘Not bad, not bad at all’, then speak of tobacco that
cost 60 or 65 rupees an ounce: would anyone like to try it? But to say
‘yes’ would mean a hunt for the key, or the assertion that his old servant
Ganesh, that rascal, must have put the tobacco heaven knows where – a
charge that Ganesh accepted serenely – till everyone chorused, ‘Don’t
worry, hākurdā, it wouldn’t have agreed with us: this tobacco will be
fine.’
hākurdā smiled at this, and didn’t repeat his offer. When people got
up to leave, he would say, ‘Well then, when are you coming to have a
bite with me?’ ‘We can fix that another time,’ they would answer. ‘Fine,’
said hākurdā, ‘let it rain a bit, and get a bit cooler. We can’t have a
proper blow-out in this heat.’ When the rain came, no one reminded him
of his promise; and if ever the subject came up, everyone said, ‘Better
wait till the rains are over.’
His friends would agree that it did not befit him to live in such a small
place, that it must be very trying for him; but it was so difficult to find a
decent place in Calcutta! It could take five or six years to find a goodsized rented house. ‘Never mind that, my friends,’ said hākurdā, ‘it’s a
pleasure to live so near you. I have a big house at Nayanjor, but I don’t
feel at home there.’ I’m sure that hākurdā knew that everyone
understood his true position; and when he pretended that the defunct
estate at Nayanjor still existed, and everyone played along with this, he
knew in his heart that this mutual deception was just an expression of
friendship.
But I found it disgusting! When one is young one wants to stamp on
vanity, however harmless, and foolishness is less forgivable than many
more serious sins. Kailas Babu was not exactly stupid; everyone sought
his help and advice; but concerning the glories of Nayanjor, he had no
sense at all. People loved him too much to object to the nonsense he

spoke, so he gave it free rein; and if anyone sang the praises of Nayanjor,
he happily swallowed the lot, never suspecting for a moment that others
might doubt it.
Often I wished I could openly knock down, with a couple of cannonshots, the old and false fortress in which he lived, which he thought to
be permanent. If a hunter sees a bird conveniently perched on a nearby
branch, he wants to shoot it; if a boy sees a hanging boulder on a
mountainside, he wants to send it rolling down with a kick. To give a
final push to a thing which is just on the point of falling, but which still
hangs on, is a satisfying act and brings applause from spectators. Kailas
Babu’s lies were so simple-minded, so slenderly based; they danced so
wantonly before the guns of Truth, that I longed to destroy them in a
trice: only my laziness and deference to convention held me back.

II
In so far as I can analyse my past state of mind, I think there was
another deep-seated reason for my malice towards Kailas Babu. This
needs some explanation.
Although I was a rich man’s son, I passed my MA on time; and despite
my youth, I did not indulge in low pleasures or company. Even after my
parents’ death, I was not corrupted by becoming master of the family. As
regards my appearance, to say I was handsome would be conceited, but
it would not be untrue. So my value in the marriage-market of Bengal
was certainly high, and I was determined to capitalize on it fully. A
beautiful, educated, only daughter of a rich man was what I wanted.
Proposals came from far and wide, offering dowries of 10,000 or
20,000 rupees. I weighed them up carefully and objectively, but none of
them seemed quite right. I found myself agreeing with Bhababhuti:
Who knows if my equal can be born?
The world is wide and life is long –

but I wondered if so rare an article would ever be found within Bengal’s
modest confines.
Parents fulsomely sang my praises, and offered me various pūjās; and

this (whether I liked their daughters or not) was quite congenial to me.
A decent fellow like me deserved their pūjās! In the Shastras one reads
that whether the gods grant favours or not, they are angry if they don’t
receive their proper pūjās: regular offerings to me gave me equally high
ideas.
I have mentioned that hākurdā had an only granddaughter. I had
often seen her, but had never considered her beautiful. I had therefore
no thought of marrying her. I expected, though, that Kailas Babu –
personally or through some intermediary – would have made an offering
to me, with his granddaughter’s marriage in mind, simply because I was
a good catch. But he didn’t do that. I heard that he had said to some
friend that the Babus of Nayanjor never on any account made the first
move: even if it meant that his granddaughter remained unmarried, he
would never break this rule. I was very offended by this, and my anger
lasted for a long time. It was only my good breeding that made me keep
quiet about it.
My nature was such, however, that in my anger there was a spark of
humour, like lightning linked to thunder. I could not do outright injury
to the old man, but I was tempted by an amusing plan. I described
earlier how people used to come out with all sorts of fibs in order to
please him. A retired Deputy Magistrate living nearby often said,
‘Ṭhākurdā, whenever I met the Lieutenant-Governor he always asked
about the Babus of Nayanjor – he said that the Rajas of Burdwan and the
Babus of Nayanjor were the only really noble families in Bengal.’
Ṭhākurdā was very chuffed at this, and if he met the retired Deputy
Magistrate would ask amidst other pleasantries, ‘How is the LieutenantGovernor? And the memsāheb? And are all their children well?’ He
intended to visit the Lieutenant-Governor one day soon. But the Deputy
Magistrate knew that many Lieutenant-Governors and GovernorGenerals would come and go before the famous four-horse coach of
Nayanjor would be ready for the visit.
One morning I went to Kailas Babu and, taking him aside, said
confidentially, ‘Ṭhākurdā, yesterday I was at the Lieutenant-Governor’s
levee. He started talking about the Babus of Nayanjor, and I told him
that Kailas Babu of Nayanjor was living in Calcutta. He was very sorry
that he had not been to see you all this time, and said that he would visit

you privately today at noon.’
Anyone else would have seen the absurdity of this, and even Kailas
Babu himself would have laughed if he had heard it told about anyone
else; but applied to himself he did not doubt the news in the slightest.
He was both delighted and flustered: where would he seat the
Lieutenant-Governor? What should he do for him? How should he
welcome him? How should he keep up the honour of Nayanjor? He had
no idea! On top of that he did not know English, so conversation would
be a problem.
‘Don’t worry about that,’ I said. ‘He’ll have an interpreter with him.
But the Lieutenant-Governor is particularly keen that no one else should
be present.’
In the afternoon, when most inhabitants of the area were at their
offices, or snoozing at home indoors, a carriage and pair drew up outside
Kailas Babu’s residence. Liveried footmen announced, ‘His Excellency the
Lieutenant-Governor.’ Ṭhākurdā was ready, dressed in old-fashioned
white pyjamas and turban; the old servant Ganesh was dressed in his
master’s dhoti, chadar and shirt. As soon as he heard the announcement,
Ganesh ran panting and trembling to the door, and, bowing low in
repeated salaams, showed into the room a close friend and
contemporary of mine, dressed in English clothes.
Spreading his one valuable shawl on to a stool, and seating the bogus
Lieutenant-Governor there, Kailas Babu delivered a long and excessively
humble speech in Urdu. He then presented, on a gold plate, one of his
carefully preserved heirlooms: a string of Moghul gold coins. Ganesh
meanwhile stood at the ready with the rose-water sprinkler and
pomatum-pot.
Kailas Babu repeatedly expressed regret that His Excellency had not
visited him in his home at Nayanjor, where he would have been able to
offer him proper hospitality. In Calcutta he was an exile, a fish out of
water: he couldn’t do anything properly – and so on.
My friend shook his top-hatted head gravely. He should, according to
English custom, have removed his hat indoors; but he tried to keep
himself covered as much as possible in case he was found out. No one
other than Kailas Babu and his besotted old servant would have fallen
for the young Bengali’s disguise for a moment.

After ten minutes my friend bowed and made his exit. Footmen, wellrehearsed, took into the impostor’s carriage the string of coins on the
gold plate, and the shawl from the stool; then, from Ganesh’s hands, the
rose-water sprinkler and pomatum-pot. Kailas Babu assumed this was the
Lieutenant-Governor’s custom. I watched all this from the next room,
and my ribs were close to cracking with suppressed laughter.
Finally, unable to bear any more, I ran into a room a bit further away:
but no sooner had I collapsed into laughter when I saw a girl slumped on
a low bed, sobbing. She stood up at once when she saw me. Choking
with tears, darting fiery glances from her large, black eyes, she snapped,
‘What has my grandfather done to you? Why have you come to trick
him? Why have you come?’ Then, unable to manage any more, she
buried her face in her sari and burst into tears again.
So much for my fit of laughter! All this time it had not entered my
head that there was anything other than humour in what I had done.
Now I saw I had hit a very tender spot; the revolting cruelty of my
action was glaringly exposed; and I slunk out of the room, ashamed and
embarrassed, like a kicked dog. What harm had the old man done me?
His innocent conceit had never harmed anyone! Why had my own
conceit been so malicious?
My eyes were opened to something else as well. For a long time I had
thought of Kusum as an item of merchandise waiting on the shelf till
some unmarried man’s notice was attracted. She was there because I
didn’t want her: let anyone who wanted have her! Now I understood
that here in this house there was a girl with a human heart inside her, a
heart whose array of feelings encompassed a land of mystery: to the east
an imponderable past, to the west an unknowable future. Did anyone
who had such a heart deserve to be picked by the size of her dowry or
the shape of her nose and eyes?
I didn’t sleep at all that night. The next morning I crept like a thief to
Ṭhākurdā’s house, carrying all the valuable things we had taken from the
old man; I intended to hand them back to the servant without saying
anything.
Flummoxed at not finding him, I heard the old man and his
granddaughter talking somewhere inside the house. The girl was asking,
with sweet affection, ‘Grandfather, what did the Lieutenant-Governor

say to you yesterday?’ hākurdā cheerfully spun a long panegyric to the
ancient house of Nayanjor, supposedly delivered by the LieutenantGovernor. The girl received it eagerly.
My eyes filled with tears at the tender, maternal deception played by
this young girl on her aged guardian. I sat silently for a long time; when
at last hākurdā had finished his story and gone, I went up to his
granddaughter with the things I had deceitfully stolen, placed them
before her, and left without a word.
When I saw the old man again, I did praṇām to him (previously, in
accordance with modern custom, I had not offered any salutation). He
presumably thought this sudden show of respect was prompted by the
Lieutenant-Governor’s visit. He excitedly described it to me, and I
happily fell in with his account. Others who were there listening knew
that it was all made up, but merrily accepted it.
When everyone had gone I nervously and humbly made a proposal. I
said that although my own lineage was in no way comparable to the
Babus of Nayanjor, yet…
When I had finished, the old man clasped me to his breast and said
joyfully, ‘I am poor – I never imagined I would have good fortune like
this, my friend – my Kusum must have won great merit in heaven for
you to favour us now.’ He wept as he spoke. This was the first time that
Kailas Babu forgot his duty to his noble ancestors and admitted he was
poor, admitted it would not do damage to the house of Nayanjor to
accept me. I had plotted to humiliate the old man, while he had longed
for me, heart and soul, as the worthiest possible groom for his
granddaughter.

Guest
I
Matilal Babu, zamindar of Kathaliya, was returning home with his family
by boat. One afternoon he moored the boat near a riverside market so
that their meal could be prepared. A Brahmin boy came over and asked,
‘Where are you going, Babu?’ The boy was not more than fifteen or
sixteen.
‘Kathaliya,’ replied Matilal Babu.
‘Could you drop me at Nandigram on the way?’
Matilal consented. ‘What’s your name?’ he asked.
‘Tarapada,’ said the boy.
The fair-skinned boy was beautiful to look at. His smile and his large
eyes had the grace of youth. His body – bare except for a stained dhoti –
was free of any excess: as if lovingly carved by a sculptor, or as if in a
previous life he had been a young sage whose pure religious devotion
had removed all grossness, honed him to gleaming, Brahminical
perfection.
‘Come and wash, bābā,’ said Matilal Babu tenderly. ‘You can eat with
us.’
‘Leave that to me,’ said Tarapada, and without a moment’s hesitation
he joined in the cooking. Matilal’s servant was Hindusthani: he was not
very good at cutting up fish.1 Tarapada took over, and soon had the dish
ready, and had cooked some vegetables too with practised skill. He then
took a dip in the river, and, opening his bundle, produced a clean white
garment and a small wooden comb. He sleeked his long hair away from
his forehead and down to his neck, adjusted his glistening sacred thread,
and stepped on to the boat.
Matilal Babu invited him into the cabin. His wife and his nine-year-old
daughter were there. His wife Annapurna was tenderly attracted to the
boy when she saw him, and wondered, ‘Whose child is he? Where has he

come from? How could his mother bear to abandon him?’ She placed
mats for Matilal and the boy to sit on, side by side. The boy was not a
big eater. Annapurna felt he must be shy, and tried to get him to eat this
or that; but when he had finished, he would not be tempted to more. He
clearly did everything according to his own wishes – but with such ease
that there was nothing assertive about him. He was not at all shy.
When everyone had eaten, Annapurna sat him next to her and asked
him about his background. She didn’t gather much. All she could
establish was that the boy had run away from home of his own volition
at the age of seven or eight.
‘Isn’t your mother alive?’ asked Annapurna.
‘She is,’ said Tarapada.
‘Doesn’t she love you?’ asked Annapurna.
Tarapada seemed to find this question peculiar. ‘Why shouldn’t she
love me?’ he said, laughing.
‘Then why did you leave her?’ said Annapurna.
‘She has four more sons and three daughters,’ said Tarapada.
Pained by this odd reply, Annapurna said, ‘What a thing to say! Just
because I have five fingers, does it mean that I want to chop one off?’
Tarapada was young, so his life-story was brief; but the boy was a
complete original. He was his parents’ fourth son, and was still a baby
when his father died. Despite there being so many in the house,
Tarapada was the darling of all; mother, brothers, sisters and neighbours
doted on him. So much so, that his tutor never beat him – everyone
would have been appalled if he had. There was no reason for him to
leave. Half-starved boys who constantly stole fruit from trees and were
thrashed by the owners of the trees – they never strayed from the village
or their scolding mothers! But this darling of everyone joined a touring
yātrā-troupe and left his village without a thought.
Search-parties went out and he was brought back. His mother pressed
him to her breast and drenched him with tears; his sisters wept too. His
elder brother tried to perform his duty as guardian; but he soon
abandoned his feeble attempts at discipline, and welcomed him back
with open arms. Women invited him to their houses, plied him with
even greater displays of affection. But he would not accept ties, even ties

of love: his stars had made him a wanderer. If he saw strange boats on
the river, or a sannyāsī from a distant region under the local peepul tree,
or if gypsies sat by the river, making mats or wicker baskets, his heart
would stir with longing to be free, to explore the outside world. And
after he had run away two or three times, family and villagers gave up
hope of him.
Again he joined a yātrā-troupe at first. But when the master of the
troupe began to treat him almost as a son, and the members of the
troupe, young and old, had all fallen for him – and even the people in
the houses where they performed (especially the women) began to make
a special fuss of him – one day, without saying a word, he disappeared,
and could not be found.
Tarapada was as wary of ties as a young fawn, and was also like a
deer in his love of music.1 The songs of the yātrā were what had first
lured him away from home. Melodies sent a trembling through his veins,
and rhythms made his body swing. Even as a baby he had shown such
solemn, grown-up attention at musical gatherings, sitting and swaying
and forgetting himself, that his elders could hardly restrain their
amusement. Not only music: when the rains of Śrābaṇ fell on the thick
leaves, when the clouds thundered, when the wind moaned in the woods
like a motherless demon-child, his heart was swept away. The call of a
kite high in the sky in the still heat of noon, the croaking of frogs on
rainy evenings, the howling of jackals at night, all entranced him.
Impelled by this passion for music, it was not long before he had joined
a group of p cāli-singers. The leader of the group carefully taught him
songs and trained him to recite p cāli by heart. He too began to love
him as his own. Like a pet cage-bird, Tarapada learnt a few songs, and
then one morning flew away.
Finally he joined a troupe of gymnasts. From Jyaistha to Āṣāṛh a fair
toured the district. Yātrā-troupes, p cāli-singers, bards, dancers and
stallholders travelled by boat from one site to another. For the second
year running this round of entertainment included a small gymnasticstroupe from Calcutta. At first Tarapada joined the stallholders – sold pān
at the fair. But then his natural curiosity drew him to the wonderful
skills of the gymnasts, and he joined their troupe. He had taught himself

to play the flute very well: during the gymnastic display he had to play
Lucknow thuṃris at top speed on the flute – this was his only task.
It was from this troupe that he had most recently absconded. He had
heard that the zamindars at Nandigram had founded, on a lavish scale,
an amateur yātrā-group, so he tied up his bundle and headed for the
place, meeting Matilal Babu on the way.
Despite these connections with various groups, his nature had not
been corrupted by any. He was, deep down, entirely detached and free.
The foul language he had heard, the dreadful sights he had seen, had not
fixed themselves in his mind. They passed him by. He remained
unbound by any kind of habit or custom. He swam in the murky waters
of the world with pure white wings, like a swan. However many times
his curiosity made him dive in, his wings could not be soaked or soiled.
There was a pure and natural innocence in this runaway boy’s
expression. So much so, that the worldly-wise Matilal Babu invited him
in without doubt or question, and with great tenderness.

II
In the afternoon the boat set sail. Annapurna continued to ask the boy
kind questions about his home and family; he answered laconically, and
then went out on deck to escape. The monsoon river, swollen to
maximum fullness, seemed to harry the earth with its reckless
turbulence. In the cloudless sunshine, the half-sunk reeds along the
bank, the fields of succulent sugar-cane beyond, and the far-off blueygreen woods kissing the horizon, seemed transformed by the touch of a
golden wand into new beauty. The speechless sky gazed down in
wonder: everything was alive, throbbing, awash with confident light,
shiny with newness, bursting with plenty.
Tarapada took refuge on the roof of the boat in the shade of the sail.
Sloping pastures, flooded jute-fields, green, rippling late-autumn paddy,
narrow paths leading from the ghāṭs, and villages shaded by encircling
foliage, came one by one into view. To this water, earth and sky, this
movement of life and sound, these varied levels and vast vistas, to this
huge, immovable, mute, unblinking, natural world, the boy was

intimately linked. Yet not for a moment did it try to hold him with its
loving embrace. Calves running on the banks with tails up-raised; ponies
grazing and hopping about with hobbled legs; kingfishers swooping from
fishing-net poles to plop into the water to catch fish; boys splashing;
women shrilly chatting as they stood chest-deep, floating their saris out
in front to rub them clean; fish-wives with baskets, saris tucked up,
buying fish from the fishermen: all of this Tarapada watched with
unflagging curiosity – never were his eyes sated.
As he sat, he soon got talking with the helmsman and oarsmen.
Sometimes he took the lagi and punted the boat himself. When the
helmsman needed a smoke, he would take the tiller; when the sail
needed to be turned, he helped skilfully.
Just before dusk Annapurna called Tarapada and asked, ‘What do you
like to eat at night?’
‘Whatever I get,’ said Tarapada. ‘I don’t eat every day.’
She felt disturbed by this beautiful Brahmin boy’s indifference to her
hospitality. She longed to feed, clothe and give succour to him. But she
could not discover how to please him. She ostentatiously sent her
servants to buy milk and sweets: Tarapada ate the sweets willingly
enough, but he would not touch the milk. Even the taciturn Matilal
urged him to drink it, but he simply replied, ‘I don’t like it.’
Three days passed. Tarapada expertly joined in everything, from the
cooking and shopping to the sailing of the boat. Anything he saw
interested him; any work that he did absorbed him. His sight, his hands
and his mind were ever-active: like Nature herself he was always serene
and detached, yet always busy. People usually dwell in a fixed place, but
Tarapada was like a joyous wave on life’s unending stream: past or
future meant nothing – moving forward was the only thing that
mattered.
By mixing with various groups, he had learnt all sorts of delightful
accomplishments. Things were stamped on his mind with astonishing
ease, unclouded as it was by any kind of worry. He knew p cāli, folktales, kīrtan, and long pieces from yātrās. Matilal Babu habitually read
the Rāmāyaṇa to his wife and daughter. One evening he had just got to
the story of Kush and Lab when Tarapada, unable to restrain himself,

came down from the roof of the boat and said, ‘Put the book away. I
know a song about Kush and Lab – listen!’
He began a p cāli. Dashu Ray’s verse, sweet as a flute, flowed on
swiftly; the helmsman and oarsmen came and peered through the door
of the cabin; as dusk fell, a stream of laughter, pathos and music spread
through the evening air: the banks became alert, and people in passing
boats were lured for a moment and strained their ears to listen. When
the p cāli had finished, everyone sighed deeply, wishing it would last
forever. The tearful Annapurna longed to take the boy and press him to
her breast and bury her face in his hair. Matilal Babu thought, ‘If I could
somehow keep this boy, he would make up for my having no son.’ The
little girl Charushashi, though, was full of envy and jealousy.

III
She was her parents’ only child, sole claimant on their affection. There
was no end to her wilfulness and obstinacy. She had her own opinions
about food, clothes and hair-styles, but there was no consistency in
them. Whenever she was invited out, her mother was terrified that she
would make impossible demands over dress. If her hair-style displeased
her, to do and redo it made no difference, and merely led to a tantrum.
She was like this with everything. But if she was in a good mood, she
was amenable to anything – and would show excessive love for her
mother, hugging her, kissing her, laughing in an unbalanced way. The
girl was a puzzle.
But now her volatile feelings began to concentrate in fierce animosity
towards Tarapada, and she caused exceptional trouble to her parents. At
meals she scowled and pushed her plate away: she would complain
about the cooking, slap the maid, and object to everything. The more
that Tarapada’s accomplishments impressed her and others, the more
angry she became. She would not admit that he had any virtues at all;
undeniable evidence of them made her even more critical. On the night
that Tarapada sang about Kush and Lab, Annapurna thought, ‘Wild
animals can be tamed by music, so perhaps my daughter will soften.’
‘How did you like it, Charu?’ she asked. She gave no answer, merely

tossed her head, implying: ‘I didn’t like it at all and shall never like it.’
Realizing that Charu was jealous, her mother stopped showing
affection for Tarapada in front of her. After dark, when Charu had gone
to bed after eating early, Annapurna would sit by the door of the cabin
and Matilal Babu and Tarapada would sit outside, and at Annapurna’s
request Tarapada would sing. With his singing, the goddess of the
sleeping, darkened homes on the bank would sink into a trance, and
Annapurna’s heart swelled with love and appreciation. But Charu would
get up and shout tearfully and angrily, ‘Mother, I can’t get to sleep with
this noise!’ She found it quite unbearable to be sent to bed on her own
while her parents sat and listened to Tarapada singing.
The natural fierceness of this fiery black-eyed girl fascinated
Tarapada. He would tell her stories, sing her songs, play her the flute,
make great efforts to win her round – but with no success at all. Only in
the afternoons when he bathed in the swollen river, sporting his fair,
pure body in a swimming display worthy of a young water-god – only
then could she not help being attracted just a little bit. She would watch
him then. But she didn’t reveal her interest to anyone, and – born actress
that she was – carried on knitting a woollen scarf with apparent
indifference to Tarapada’s water-sports.

IV
Tarapada took no notice of Nandigram when they passed it. The large
boat – sometimes with its sails up, sometimes towed – proceeded slowly
on down rivers and tributaries, and the days of the passengers too
flowed with a soft and easy pace through the peace and beauty of the
scene. No one was in any kind of hurry; long afternoons were spent
bathing and eating; and as soon as dusk fell the boat was moored at a
village ghāṭ, by trees buzzing with crickets and aglow with fireflies.
After about ten days of this the boat arrived at Kathaliya. Ponies and a
palanquin were sent from the house to receive the zamindar; a guard of
honour (with bamboo lāṭhis) fired rounds of blanks – raucously echoed
by the village crows.
Meanwhile Tarapada slipped off the boat and quickly looked round

the village. Calling one villager Dādā, another Khuṛā, another Didi, and
another Māsī, he established friendly relations with everyone in a couple
of hours. Because he had no normal ties, he could get to know people
with amazing ease and speed. Within a few days he had won all hearts.
He mixed with everyone on equal terms. He was unconventional, yet
able to adapt to any situation or work. With boys he was a boy, yet
somehow separate and special; with older people he was not a boy, yet
not too precocious either; with herders he was a herder, yet also a
Brahmin. He joined in with things as if used to them all his life. He’d be
chatting in the sweet-shop: the sweet-maker would say, ‘Could you mind
the shop for a while? I shan’t be long.’ Cool as a cucumber, Tarapada sat
there keeping the flies off the sandeś with a śāl-leaf. He could even make
sweets himself, knew something of weaving, and was not completely
ignorant of how to turn a potter’s wheel.
Tarapada reigned over the whole village; there was just one young girl
whose hatred he simply could not overcome. Perhaps it was because this
girl so fiercely wished him to leave that he stayed on so long. But
Charushashi now proved how hard it is to fathom even a juvenile female
mind.
Bāmunṭhākrun’s1 daughter Sonamani had been widowed at the age of
five; she was Charu’s playmate. She had been ill for a while, and had not
been able to go out to see her friend. When she was recovered and came
to see her again, a rift between them came about for almost no reason.
Charu had been speaking at length about Tarapada: she hoped, by
saying what a precious asset he was, to astonish and intrigue her friend.
But when she discovered he was known to Sonamani, that he called
Bāmunthākrun Māsī and that Sonamani called him Dādā; when she
heard that he not only treated mother and daughter to kīrtan-tunes on
his flute but had, at Sonamani’s request, made her a bamboo flute; that
he’d picked her fruits from high branches and flowers from thorny ones;
when she heard all this, darts of fire stabbed her. She had thought of
Tarapada as their Tarapada – guarded closely, so that ordinary people
might glimpse him yet never be able to grasp him: they would admire
his beauty and talents from a distance, and Charushashi’s family would
gain glory thereby. Why should Sonamani have such easy contact with
this singular, divinely favoured Brahmin boy? If Charu’s family had not

taken him in, had not looked after him so, how would Sonamani ever
have seen him? Sonamani’s Dādā indeed! She burned all over at the
thought.
Why was the Charu who had tried to strike the boy down with arrows
of hatred so anxious to claim sole rights over him? Understand this who
will.
Later that day Charu had a serious rift with Sonamani over another
trivial matter. She marched into Tarapada’s room, found his beloved
flute, and callously jumped and stamped on it. She was still doing so
when Tarapada came in. He was amazed by the image of destruction
that the girl presented.
‘Charu, why are you smashing my flute?’ he asked.
‘I want to smash it! I’m going to smash it!’ shouted Charu with red eyes
and flushed face; and, stamping unnecessarily on the already smashed
flute, she burst into loud sobs and ran from the room. Tarapada picked
up the pieces, turned them this way and that, but it was useless. To
wreak destruction on his old, innocent flute was so absurd that he burst
out laughing. Charushashi intrigued him more every day.
He was also intrigued by the English illustrated books in Matilal
Babu’s library. Tarapada had considerable knowledge of the world, but
he could not enter the world of these pictures at all. He tried to do so in
his imagination, but found no satisfaction in this. Seeing his interest in
these books, Matilal said one day, ‘Would you like to learn English?
You’ll understand these pictures then.’
‘I would like to learn it,’ he replied at once.
Matilal Babu happily engaged the headmaster of the village secondary
school – Ramratan Babu – to teach the boy English each evening.

V
Tarapada set about learning English with great concentration and
retention. It released him into a hitherto inaccessible realm, unconnected
with his former world. The local people saw no more of him; at dusk,
when he went to the empty riverside to pace swiftly up and down
reciting his lessons, his boyish devotees mournfully watched from a

distance; they dared not disturb his studies.
Charu too did not see much of him now. Formerly Tarapada ate in the
women’s quarters, under Annapurna’s loving gaze; but because this
could take a long time he asked Matilal Babu to arrange for him to eat
outside them. Annapurna was hurt by this and objected, but Matilal was
so pleased by Tarapada’s keenness to learn that he agreed to the new
arrangement.
Charu now insisted that she too wanted to learn English. At first her
parents were amused by their wayward daughter’s new idea, lovingly
laughed at it; but its absurdity was soon washed away by tears. Doting
parents that they were, they were forced to give in, and she started to
study alongside Tarapada with the same tutor.
Study, however, was alien to her restless nature. She learned nothing
herself – merely disrupted Tarapada’s learning. She fell far behind,
couldn’t learn anything by heart, but couldn’t bear to be behind! If
Tarapada overtook her and moved on to a new lesson, she was furious
and burst into tears. When he finished an old book and bought a new
one, she had to buy the new book too. In his spare time he would sit in
his room learning and writing his lessons: the jealous girl couldn’t stand
this – she would secretly come and pour ink on his exercise-book, steal
his pen, even tear from the book the passage he had been set to learn.
Tarapada bore most of this with amusement: if she went too far he
slapped her, but he was quite unable to control her.
A chance occurrence saved him. One day, truly annoyed, he tore up
his ink-spilled exercise-book and sat gloomily. Charu came to the door,
and prepared herself for a beating. But nothing happened: Tarapada
went on sitting in silence. The girl went in and out of the room. Several
times she came so close that Tarapada could, if he had wished, easily
have thwacked her on the back. But he did not do that, and remained
solemn. The girl was in a quandary. How to ask for forgiveness was
something she had never learnt; yet she was extremely anxious for
forgiveness. Finally, seeing no other way, she took a piece of the torn
exercise-book, sat down next to Tarapada and wrote in large round
letters, ‘I will never pour ink on your exercise-book again.’ She then
made elaborate efforts to attract his attention. At this Tarapada could
not contain himself any more, and he burst out laughing. The girl dashed

from the room, overcome with shame and anger. Only if she had been
able to expunge from all time the paper on which she had humbled
herself, would her fury have been eased.
During this period Sonamani had once or twice, with her heart in her
mouth, lurked outside the lesson-room. She was close to her friend
Charushashi in most matters, but with regard to Tarapada she feared and
distrusted her. At moments when Charu was in the women’s quarters,
she would stand timidly outside Tarapada’s door. He would look up from
his book and say tenderly, ‘What is it, Sona, what’s up? How is Māsī?’
Sonamani would say, ‘You haven’t been to see us for a long time –
Mother wishes you would sometime. She has backache, so she can’t
come to you.’
Charu would perhaps now appear. Sonamani was flustered: she felt
like a thief. Charu would scowl and shriek at her, ‘Well, Sona – coming
to disturb our studies! I’ll tell my father!’ As if she herself was
Tarapada’s guardian, whose sole object was to watch him day and night
in case his studies were disturbed! But God was not unaware of what her
actual motive was in coming to Tarapada’s room at this odd time, and
Tarapada also knew it well. Poor Sonamani fumbled for false
explanations; when Charu venomously called her a liar she withdrew,
sick at heart, defeated. The kindly Tarapada would call her and say,
‘Sona, I’ll come to your house this evening.’ Charu hissed back like a
snake, ‘How can you go? What about your lessons? I’ll tell Māṣṭārmaśāy!’
Undaunted by Charu’s threat, Tarapada spent a couple of evenings at
Bāmunthākrun’s house. On the third day Charu, without further
warning, quietly bolted his door; and, fetching the padlock from her
mother’s spice-box, locked him in. She kept him prisoner for the whole
evening, only opening the door when it was time to eat. Tarapada was
angrily silent, and was about to go out without eating. Then the
passionate, overwrought girl clasped her hands and cried out repeatedly,
‘I promise you – cross my heart – that I won’t do it again. Please, I beg
you, eat before you go!’ When even this had no effect she began to wail,
and he was forced to turn back and eat.
Charu many times promised herself that she would behave properly
towards Tarapada, that she would not annoy him again; but when
Sonamani and others turned up it put her into such a rage that she could

not control herself. If she was good for a few days, Tarapada would steel
himself for another tempest. No one could say how the attack would
come or on what grounds. There would be a mighty storm, and floods of
tears to follow, and after that peace and affection again.

VI
Almost two years passed like this. Tarapada had never moored himself to
anyone for so long. Maybe his studies had a hold on him; or maybe he
was changing as he grew up, and a stable existence in a comfortable
house had more appeal than before. Maybe the beauty of his studycompanion – even if she had been constantly bad-tempered – was
exerting unconscious influence.
Meanwhile Charu had reached the age of eleven. Matilal Babu had
sought out two or three good marriage-offers. Now that she had reached
marriageable age, he placed a ban on English books and outside visits.
She kicked up a terrible fuss at these new restrictions.
Then one day Annapurna called Matilal and said, ‘Why search outside
for a groom? Tarapada would make a fine husband. And your daughter
likes him.’
Matilal Babu was astonished at this suggestion. ‘That’s impossible,’ he
said. ‘We don’t know anything about his family. She’s my only daughter:
I want to marry her well.’
Some people came from the zamindar’s house at Raydanga to look at
the girl. Efforts were made to dress Charu up: she shut herself in her
room and refused to come out. Matilal Babu begged and rebuked her
from outside, but without result. Finally he had to lie to the delegation
from Raydanga: his daughter had suddenly fallen ill, and could not be
seen today. They assumed from this lame excuse that the girl had some
kind of defect.
Matilal Babu started to reflect that Tarapada was indeed good to look
at, good in every outward aspect; he could keep him at home, so his only
daughter would not have to go to someone else’s house. He realized that
his truculent daughter’s foibles, which he and his wife could smile at,
would not be received so well by in-laws.

After lengthy discussion, Matilal and Annapurna sent a man to
Tarapada’s village to find out about his family. The information came
that it was poor, but high-caste. Matilal Babu then sent a marriageproposal to the boy’s mother and brothers. They were well-pleased, and
agreed to it at once.
Back at Kathaliya, Matilal and Annapurna discussed the day and hour
of the wedding, but the naturally cautious Matilal kept the whole matter
secret.
Charu, though, could not be restricted. She sometimes burst into
Tarapada’s room like a cavalry-charge, disturbing his studies with
crossness, eagerness or scorn. Sometimes, detached and independent
though he was, he felt a strange stirring in his heart at this, a sort of
electrical impulse. Till now he had floated lightly and serenely without
impediment on Time’s stream: sometimes now he was snared by strange
distracting day-dreams. He would leave his studies and go into Matilal
Babu’s library and flick through the pages of the illustrated books; the
imaginary world which he mixed with these pictures was much changed
– much more highly-coloured than before. He could not laugh at Charu’s
strange behaviour quite as he had done in the past. When she was bad
he never thought of beating her now. This deep change, this powerful
feeling of attraction, was like a new dream.
Matilal Babu fixed the wedding for the month of Śrābaṇ, and sent
word to Tarapada’s mother and brothers; but he did not inform Tarapada
himself. He told his moktār in Calcutta to hire a trumpet-and-drum band,
and he ordered everything else that would be needed for the wedding.
Early monsoon clouds formed in the sky. The village-river had been
dried up for weeks; there was water only in holes here and there; small
boats lay stuck in these pools of muddy water, and the dry river-bed was
rutted with bullock-cart tracks. But now, like Parvati returning to her
parents’ home, gurgling waters returned to the empty arms of the
village: naked children danced and shouted on the river-bank, jumped
into the water with voracious joy as if trying to embrace the river; the
villagers gazed at the river like a dear friend; a huge wave of life and
delight rolled through the parched village. There were boats big and
small with cargoes from far and wide; in the evenings the ghāṭ resounded
with the songs of foreign boatmen. The villages along the river had spent

the whole year confined to their own small worlds: now, with the rains,
the vast outside world had come in its earth-coloured watery chariot,
carrying wondrous gifts to the villages, as if on a visit to its daughters.
Rustic smallness was temporarily subsumed by pride of contact with the
world; everything became more active; the bustle of distant cities came
to this sleepy region, and the whole sky rang.
Meanwhile at Kurulkata, on the Nag family estate, a famous chariotfestival was due to be held. One moonlit evening Tarapada went to the
ghāt and saw, on the swift flood-tide, boats with merry-go-rounds and
yātrā-troupes, and cargo-boats rapidly making for the fair. An orchestra
from Calcutta was practising loudly as it passed; the yātrā-troupe was
singing to violin accompaniment, shouting out the beats; boatmen from
lands to the west split the sky with cymbals and thudding drums. Such
excitement! Then clouds from the east covered the moon with their huge
black sails; an east wind blew sharply; cloud after cloud rolled by; the
river gushed and swelled; darkness thickened in the swaying riverside
trees; frogs croaked; crickets rasped like wood-saws. To Tarapada the
whole world seemed like a chariot-festival: wheels turning, flags flying,
earth trembling, clouds swirling, wind rushing, river flowing, boats
sailing, songs rising! There were rumbles of thunder, and slashes of
lightning in the sky: the smell of torrential rain approached from the
dark distance. But Kathaliya village next to the river ignored all this: she
shut her doors, turned out her lamps and went to sleep.
The following morning Tarapada’s mother and brothers arrived at
Kathaliya; and that same morning three large boats from Calcutta, laden
with things for the wedding, moored at the zamindar’s ghāt; and very
early, that same morning, Sonamani brought some mango-juice
preserve1 in paper and some pickle wrapped in a leaf, and timidly stood
outside Tarapada’s room – but Tarapada was not to be seen. In a cloudy
monsoon night, before love and emotional ties could encircle him
completely, this Brahmin boy, thief of all hearts in the village, had
returned to the unconstraining, unemotional arms of his mother Earth.

Wishes Granted
Subalchandra’s son was called Sushilchandra. But people do not always
suit their names.1 Subalchandra was not strong, and Sushilchandra was
not very well-behaved. He would go around annoying all the people of
the neighbourhood. His father tried to chase after him, but he had
rheumatism in his legs and the boy could run like a deer; so the cuffs,
blows and slaps did not always fall in the right places. But whenever
Sushilchandra was caught, he did not get off lightly.
Today was Saturday and school stopped at two o’clock, but
Sushilchandra did not want to go to school at all. There were many
reasons for this. One was that today there was to be a geography test;
another was that tonight there was to be a firework display at the Boses’
house near by. The preparations had started in the morning. Sushil
wanted to spend the day there.
After a lot of thought, he lay down on his bed when it was time to go
to school. His father Subal asked him, ‘What’s this? Lying on your bed?
Aren’t you going to school?’
‘I’ve got a stomachache,’ said Sushil, ‘I can’t go to school today.’
‘Just you wait!’ said Subal to himself, seeing right through him, and
went on: ‘Then you’d better not go out anywhere. I’ll send Hari to watch
the Boses’ fireworks. I had bought some toffee for you today; you’d
better not eat that either. You stay here quietly, and I’ll make some
herbal medicine for you.’
Bolting the door, he went and prepared an extremely bitter herbal
medicine. Sushil was in a fix: he hated medicine quite as much as he
loved toffee. He had been looking forward ever since yesterday night to
going to the Boses’ house, and now it was ruled out.
When Subal Babu returned to the room with a large bowl of medicine,
Sushil jumped up from his bed saying, ‘My stomachache is completely
gone – I’ll go to school.’
‘Out of the question,’ said Subal. ‘Drink the medicine and rest quietly.’
He forced him to drink the medicine and went out again, locking the

door with a padlock.
As he lay on the bed weeping, Sushil kept thinking, ‘If only I could be
as old as Father! I could do as I liked and no one would be able to stop
me!’
His father Subal was sitting alone outside the room and thinking, ‘My
parents spoilt me so – I never did any proper study. If only I could have
my childhood back, I wouldn’t waste any time – I’d do nothing but
school work.’
The Goddess of Desires1 was passing by at that time. Seeing what
father and son desired, she decided, ‘Right – let their wishes be granted
for a while.’ So she said to the father, ‘Your wish is fulfilled. From
tomorrow you will be as young as your son.’ To the boy she said, ‘From
tomorrow you will be as old as your father.’ They were both delighted.
The elderly Subalchandra did not sleep well at night – he used to fall
asleep towards dawn. But today what happened? He woke up bright and
early, and positively sprang out of bed. He found he was very small; all
his lost teeth had been restored; his beard and moustache had vanished.
The dhoti and shirt he had gone to sleep in were so loose and baggy that
the sleeves practically reached the floor, the neck reached down to his
chest, and the bottom of the dhoti drooped so low that he tripped on it.
Sushilchandra normally got up early and ran around making mischief,
but today he didn’t wake up. When he was roused by Subalchandra’s
shouting, he found his clothes were so tight that they were in danger of
bursting at the seams. His body had expanded all round; half his face
was hidden by a pepper-and-salt beard; and when he felt his head, which
formerly had a full shock of hair, he found a gleaming bald patch. He
did not want to get out of bed. He yawned noisily, rolled over to this
side and that; and at last – greatly annoyed by his father’s shouts – he
staggered to his feet.
Both had had their wishes fulfilled; but with very awkward
consequences. Earlier I said that Sushilchandra had thought that if he
could be big and free like his father Subalchandra, he would climb trees
as he pleased, jump into water, eat green mangoes, grab bird-chicks, and
wander all over the fields. He would come home and eat when he liked,
and no one would be able to stop him. But the extraordinary thing was
that when he woke up this morning he had no wish to climb trees. When

he saw the pond he felt he would catch his death of cold if he jumped
into it. Instead, he spread out a mat on the verandah, and quietly sat
down to think.
He decided that it would not be good to give up games completely; he
ought to have a go. So he tried several times to climb an āmṛā tree. The
day before he would have climbed it as nimbly as a squirrel; but now
with his old body he couldn’t climb it at all. A slender branch low down
broke under his weight and he thudded to the ground. Passers-by burst
out laughing at the sight of an old man climbing a tree like a boy and
falling. Hanging his head in shame, Sushilchandra returned to the mat
on the verandah.
Calling the servant he said, ‘Hey, go and buy me a rupee’s worth of
toffee!’ He had a passion for toffee. There were various kinds displayed
in a shop near the school; he bought them with the few odd paisa he got
as pocket-money – and was determined that when he had money like his
father he would stuff his pockets full of sweets and eat them all the time!
Today the servant brought him a whole bagful: he took one, put it into
his toothless mouth, and started to suck – but a child’s sweets are not
right at all for an old man. ‘My father is now a little boy, so he can have
them,’ he thought to himself; but then he thought, ‘No, I can’t do that –
it will make him ill to eat so many.’
Until yesterday all the local boys had played kapāṭi with
Sushilchandra, but today when they came to look for him and found the
elderly Sushilchandra, they ran off. He had thought, ‘If I were free like
my father I would spend all day playing kapāṭi with my chums – ḍu-ḍuḍu-ḍu all day long!’ But today he didn’t want to see Rakhal, Gopal,
Akshay, Nibaran, Harish and Nanda – he wanted to sit quietly. Boys
were too noisy.
I said earlier that his father Subalchandra used to sit on a mat on the
verandah and think, ‘When I was young I used to waste my time
mucking about; if I could be young again I’d be a good boy – I’d sit
indoors with the door closed and learn my lessons. I’d even stop
listening to Grandmother’s stories in the evening: instead I’d study till
ten or eleven at night.’
But now that he was a boy again, Subalchandra didn’t want to go to
school at all. When Sushil irritably asked, ‘Father, aren’t you going to

school?’ Subal scratched his head, looked at his feet and murmured, ‘I’ve
got a stomachache today. I can’t go to school.’
‘Can’t you indeed?’ said Sushil angrily. ‘I’ve also had stomachaches
like that at going to school. I know all about them.’
Indeed Sushil had shirked school on so many pretexts and so recently
that there was no way his father could deceive him. He packed his little
father off to school. As soon as he got back, he wanted to dash straight
out and play, but the elderly bespectacled Sushilchandra was at that
very time intoning to himself from a copy of Krittibas’s Rāmāyaṇa, and
Subal’s noise and running about disturbed his reading. So he sat Subal
down in front of him, put a slate into his hand and made him do sums.
He devised such huge sums that it took his father an hour to complete
just one of them. In the evening a crowd of old men gathered in Sushil’s
room to play chess. To keep Subal quiet at that time, Sushil engaged a
tutor who taught him till ten at night.
Sushil was very strict about food, because when his father had been
old his digestion had not been good – if he ate too much he suffered
from acidity. Sushil remembered this well, so he was careful not to let
him over-eat. But now that he was suddenly young again his father had
such an appetite that he could have eaten a horse! Sushil gave him so
little that he raged with hunger. He grew very thin – his bones stuck out
all over. Thinking he was seriously ill, Sushil stuffed him with medicine.
But the elderly Sushil also had many difficulties. He could not bear
what formerly he had liked. Before, if he heard of a yātrā anywhere, he
would run out of the house, however cold or rainy, to watch it. When
the elderly Sushil tried that, he got a cold and cough, pains in his head
and limbs, and had to stay three weeks in bed. He had long been used to
bathing in the village pond, but no sooner had he tried that now than
the joints in his arms and legs swelled and he got terrible rheumatism:
he had to be treated by a doctor for six months. After that he bathed in
warm water only, at two-day intervals, and refused to let Subal bathe in
the pond. Once he forgot his age and jumped out of bed with a single
bound, jarring his bones terribly. When he stuffed a whole pān into his
mouth, he found he had no teeth, and couldn’t chew it. If he absentmindedly combed or brushed his whole head, the scratching reminded
him that most of it was bald. Sometimes he forgot he was as old as his

father had been and lapsed into tricks such as chucking pebbles into old
women’s water-pots. When people drove him off, scandalized that an old
man could behave like a child, he wanted to hide his face with shame.
Subalchandra also sometimes forgot that he was now a little boy.
Imagining that he was as old as previously, he would go and join the old
folks at their card-playing, sit down and chat to them as equals; at which
everyone said, ‘Run off and play, run along now! Who do you think you
are?’ And seizing him by the ears, they threw him out. Or he’d go to the
schoolmaster and say, ‘Have you got some tobacco to spare?’ I feel like a
smoke.’ The schoolmaster made him stand on one leg on a bench for
this. Or he’d go to the barber and say, ‘Why haven’t you come to shave
me for so long, you scoundrel?’ ‘Cheeky devil,’ thought the barber, and
answered, ‘I’ll come in ten years’ time.’ Sometimes he tried to beat his
son Sushil as he had often done before. Sushil was incensed at this and
said, ‘Is that what school has taught you? To have a go at an old man,
you little rascal!’ People came running from all around to slap and beat
and hurl abuse at him.
Then Subal started to pray fervently, ‘If only I could be big and free
like my son Sushil, I’d be out of this!’ And Sushil said with clasped
hands, ‘O God, make me small like my father, so that I can play around
as I like. My father has become so naughty that I cannot control him; it’s
getting me down.’
The Goddess of Desires came back and said, ‘Well, have you got what
you wanted?’
They both knelt and did praṇām to her and said, ‘We assure you,
Goddess, we have. Now make us what we were before.’
‘All right,’ said the Goddess of Desires, ‘when you wake up tomorrow
you’ll be back to what you were.’
The next morning when Subal woke up he was as old as formerly; and
Sushil when he woke up was a boy again. They both assumed they had
woken from a dream. Subalchandra shouted out gruffly, ‘Sushil, are you
learning your grammar?’
‘I think I’ve lost my book, Father,’ said Sushilchandra, scratching his
head.

False Hope
Darjeeling was swathed in rain and cloud when I arrived. I didn’t want
to go outside, but to stay indoors was even more unappealing. Straight
after my hotel breakfast I put on heavy boots and a full-length
mackintosh, and went out for a walk. It was drizzling intermittently, and
the thick pall of cloud all around gave the impression that God was
trying to erase the entire scene, mountains and all, with a rubber.
As I walked along the deserted Calcutta road, I hated these misty
heights and wished I could grasp with all five senses Earth’s busy variety
and colour again. It was then that I heard the pathetic sound of a woman
crying, not far off. Life is so tragic and troubled that the sound of crying
is nothing out of the ordinary, and at any other time I doubt if I would
have looked round; but here amidst the clouds the sound seemed like the
cry of a whole vanished world. I could not ignore it.
I approached, and saw a woman sitting on a rock by the road,
weeping. Her clothes were ochre-coloured, and her matted, lightcoloured hair was scooped up into a top-knot. Hers was no recent grief:
long suppressed exhaustion and misery had snapped under the weight of
the clouds and desolation, and had burst out. ‘This is odd,’ I said to
myself. ‘I could base a brilliant story on this. I never thought to see a
sannyāsinī sitting on a mountainside!’ I could not tell which caste she
was. I asked her kindly in Hindi, ‘Who are you? What’s happened to
you?’
At first she did not answer, and merely glanced at me with fiery,
tearful eyes. I spoke again: ‘Don’t be afraid – I’m a gentleman.’ She
smiled then and said in flawless Hindusthani, ‘I’ve been beyond fear and
terror for a long time now – shame, too. Once, Babuji, I lived in such
purdah that even my own brother had to ask for permission to see me.
But nothing hides me from the world now.’
I was rather annoyed. My clothes and manners were those of a sāheb.
Yet this wretched woman addressed me, without hesitation, as ‘Babuji’. I
felt like ditching the story and stumping off in my best sāheb’s manner,

nose in the air and puffing cigarette-smoke like a train. But curiosity got
the better of me. I asked her, tilting my head haughtily, ‘Can I help you?
Do you need anything?’
She stared straight at me, and after a pause replied briefly, ‘I am the
daughter of Golamkader Khan, Nawab of Badraon.’
I had not the slightest idea where Badraon was or who Golamkader
Khan was or why his daughter should be sitting by the Calcutta Road in
Darjeeling and weeping. I didn’t believe her, either, but decided I would
not spoil the fun, or the chance of such a good story. So I made a lengthy
and solemn salaam before her and said, ‘Bibisaheb, forgive me, I did not
know who you were.’ (There are many logical reasons why I did not
know her, the chief one being that I had never seen her before, and on
top of that the mist was so thick it was hard to see one’s own hands and
feet.) ‘Bibisaheb’ did not take offence, and pointing to a rock next to her
said pleasantly, ‘Sit down.’
I could see she was used to giving orders. I felt surprisingly honoured
at being allowed to sit on a wet, hard, mossy rock beside her. The
daughter of Golamkader Khan of Badraon, the Princess Nurunni Shah or
Meherunni Shah or whatever she was called, had graciously given me a
muddy seat by the Calcutta Road in Darjeeling, next to her and at about
the same height! When I set out from the hotel in my mackintosh, I
never dreamt of such a lofty possibility.
It might seem like poetry: a man and a woman mysteriously
conversing on a rocky mountainside. Hot from the pen of a poet, it
would rouse in the reader’s heart the sounds of streams gurgling in
mountain caves, or the wonderful music of Kalidasa’s Meghadūta or
Kumārasambhava. Yet surely there must be few representatives of Young
Bengal1 who would not have felt ridiculous sitting in boots and
mackintosh by the Calcutta Road on a muddy rock with a ragged
Hindusthani lady! But we were wrapped in mist, there was no one to see
us, no cause for embarrassment, no one but the Nawab of Badraon
Golamkader Khan’s daughter and I – a freshly minted Bengali sāheb –
two people on two rocks, like relics of a totally destroyed world. The
great absurdity of our incongruous meeting concerned only our destinies,
no one else’s.
‘Bibisaheb,’ I said, ‘who put you into this state?’

The Princess of Badraon struck her forehead. ‘How can I know how
things are caused? Who is it who hides these huge, harsh mountains in
flimsy clouds?’
I agreed with her, not wishing to start a philosophic debate. ‘Yes
indeed, who knows the mysteries of Fate? We crawl like worms before
them.’
I would have argued, I would not have let Bibisaheb off so lightly –
but my Hindi was insufficient. The little I had learnt from dealing with
watchmen and bearers did not permit me to discuss Fate and Free Will
with a Princess of Badraon or of any other place, sitting by the Calcutta
Road.
Bibisaheb said, ‘The extraordinary story of my life has only just
finished. At your command I shall tell it to you.’
‘Command?’ I said, rather flustered. ‘If you favour me with it I shall be
highly honoured.’
No one should think that I spoke exactly like this, but in Hindi. I
wanted to, but I was not capable of doing so. When Bibisaheb spoke, it
was like a delicate morning breeze stirring a dewy golden cornfield:
there was such easy meekness in her flow of sentences, such beauty. And
I could only reply in blunt, barbarous, broken phrases. I had never
known such effortless excellence of speech; as I talked to Bibisaheb I felt,
for the first time, my own inadequacy.
‘My father,’ she said, ‘had the blood of the Emperor of Delhi in his veins,
and in order to preserve the honour of his family went to great lengths
to find me a suitable husband. A proposal came from the Nawab of
Lucknow: my father was dealing with this when the fighting broke out
between the British and the sepoys over cartridge-biting, and
Hindusthan turned dark with the smoke of cannon-fire.’1
I had never before heard Hindusthani spoken by a woman, let alone by a
high-born lady, and as I listened it was clear to me that this was
aristocrat’s language and that the days of this language were over.
Everything today has been lowered, stunted, stripped by the railways
and telegraph, by the hurly-burly of work, by the extinction of the

nobility. As I listened to this nawab’s language amidst the thick mists of
British-built, modern, stony Darjeeling, an imaginary Mogul city arose in
my mind, with huge white marble palaces soaring into the sky, with
long-tailed liveried horses in the streets and elephants with goldtasselled howdahs; a city whose people wore many-coloured turbans,
baggy shirts and pyjamas of wool and silk and muslin, with brocade
slippers curled up at the toes, and scimitars tied to their waists; a
leisured, elegant, courteous way of life.
‘Our fort,’ said the Nawab’s daughter, ‘was on the bank of the Yamuna.
Our army-commander was a Hindu Brahmin, called Keshar Lal.’
The woman seemed to pour all the music of her voice into that one
name ‘Keshar Lal’. I laid my walking-stick on the ground and settled
myself into a bolt-upright position.
‘Keshar Lal was a strict Hindu. When I got up in the morning I would
look from the window of the zenana and watch him immerse himself up
to the chest in the Yamuna, watch him circumambulating with hands
cupped in an offering to the rising sun. He would sit with sopping
clothes on the ghāṭ, recite mantras devotedly, and then sing a hymn
clearly and smoothly in Rāg Bhairavī as he walked back to his house.
‘I was a Muslim girl, but I had never been told about my religion and I
did not know its doctrines and practices. Among our menfolk, religious
rules had been weakened by indolence, drinking and self-indulgence;
and in the luxury of the zenana, too, religion was not much alive.
‘God probably implanted in me a natural thirst for religion – I cannot
see how else it was caused. Be that as it may, at the sight of Keshar Lal
performing his rituals in the pure dawn light on the bare white steps
down to the calm blue Yamuna, my hitherto dormant feelings were
seized by a sweet, unspoken devotion.
‘With his regular, disciplined piety, and his fair and supple body,
Keshar Lal was like a smokeless flame: his Brahminical sanctity and
grace chastened the ignorant heart of a Muslim girl with a strange
reverence.
‘I had a Hindu maid who did obeisance before Keshar Lal every day
and took the dust of his feet. The sight of this pleased me but also made

me jealous. On days when special rites were observed, this maid would
also sometimes lay on meals for Brahmins. I offered to help with the cost
of this, saying, “Why not invite Keshar Lal?” She answered in horror,
“Keshar Lal does not take food or gifts from anyone.” It gnawed at my
heart that I could not make any direct or indirect expression of devotion
to Keshar Lal.
‘One of my ancestors had abducted a Brahmin girl and married her. As
I sat inside the zenana, I felt her pure blood in my veins and found some
comfort in thinking I was linked to Keshar Lal by that thread. I listened
to everything my Hindu maid could tell me about Hinduism, its customs
and rules, its amazing tales of gods and goddesses, its marvellous
Rāmāyaṇa and Mahābhārata; as I listened, a wonderful picture of the
Hindu world unfolded before me. Statues and idols, the sounds of bells
and conches, gold-topped temples, the smoke of incense, the scent of
flowers and sandalwood, the unearthly powers of yogis and sannyāsīs,
superhuman Brahmins, the wiles and sports of gods in human disguise:
all combined to create a realm that was supernatural, distant, vast and
immeasurably old. My heart was like a bird without a nest, flying at
dusk from room to room of a huge and ancient palace. To my girlish
mind, the Hindu world was an enchanting fairy-tale kingdom.
‘It was at this time that the fighting broke out between the Company
and the sepoys. Waves of revolt spread even to our small fort. Keshar Lal
said, “The pale-skinned cow-eaters must be driven from Aryavarta!
Hindu and Muslim kings must be free again to gamble for power!”
‘My father Golamkader Khan was a calculating man. “Those damned
English can do the impossible,” he said. “The people of Hindusthan can
never match them. I’m not going to stake this little fort of mine on so
slender a chance. Don’t ask me to fight with the Honourable Company!”
‘At a time when the blood of both Hindus and Muslims was on fire, we
were all enraged by my father’s merchant-like prudence. Even my
mother and step-mothers were stirred. Soon Keshar Lal came with an
armed troop, and said to my father, “Nawabsaheb, if you don’t join us I
shall take you prisoner while the fighting lasts and command the fort
myself.”
‘ “There is no need for that,” said my father. “I’m on your side.”
‘ “Give us some money from your treasury,” said Keshar Lal.

‘My father did not give much. “I’ll give you more when you need it,”
he said.
‘I took my whole array of ornaments, tied them up in a cloth and gave
them to my Hindu maid to take to Keshar Lal. He accepted them. I
tingled with pleasure at this, all over my denuded body.
‘With the scraping and polishing of rusty guns and the sharpening of
ancient swords, Keshar Lal began to get ready. But suddenly, one
afternoon, the District Commissioner arrived: his red-shirted soldiers
stormed into the fort, raising clouds of dust. My father Golamkader Khan
had secretly given him news of the revolt.
‘Keshar Lal commanded such loyalty in the Nawab’s guard that they
fought to the death with their broken guns and blunt swords.
‘My traitorous father’s house was like hell to me. I was bursting with
grief and hatred, but I did not shed a single tear. I dressed in the clothes
of my cowardly brother and escaped from the zenana, while no one was
looking.
‘Dust, gunpowder smoke, the shouting of soldiers and the noise of
guns died down, and the terrible stillness of death settled over land and
water and sky. The sun set, turning the Yamuna red, and a nearly full
moon hung in the evening sky. The battlefield was strewn with hideous
scenes of death. At any other time my heart would have been pierced by
the pity of it, but instead I wandered around as if in a trance, trying to
find Keshar Lal – no other aim had meaning for me. I searched until, in
the middle of the night, in bright moonlight, not far from the battlefield,
on the bank of the Yamuna, in the shade of a mango-grove, I came
across the dead bodies of Keshar Lal and his loyal batman. I could see
that – appallingly wounded – either master had carried servant or
servant had carried master from the battlefield to this place of safety,
where they had quietly given themselves up to Death.
‘The first thing I did was fulfil the craving I had had for so long to
abase myself before Keshar Lal. I fell to my knees beside him, loosed my
long tresses, and fervently rubbed the dust from his feet. I raised his icecold soles to my feverish forehead, and kissed them; months of
suppressed tears welled up. But then his body moved, and a weak groan
emerged from his lips. I drew back in alarm at the sound. With closed
eyes and parched voice he murmured, “Water.”

‘I ran to the Yamuna – returned with my clothes soaking wet. I wrung
the water out over Keshar Lal’s half-open lips, and tore wet strips of
cloth to bind the ghastly wound that had destroyed his left eye. I
brought him water a few more times in this way, and as I moistened his
face and eyes he slowly regained some consciousness. “Shall I give you
more water?” I asked.
‘ “Who are you?” said Keshar Lal.
‘I could not hold back any more and said, “I am your humble, devoted
servant. I am the daughter of Golamkader Khan, the Nawab.” At least he
would die knowing my devotion to him! No one could deprive me of the
joy of that feeling.
‘But as soon as he heard who I was he roared out like a lion,
“Daughter of an arch-traitor! Heretic! You, a Muslim, have profaned my
religion by giving me water at my time of death!” He struck me a heavy
blow on my cheek with his right hand: everything swam before my eyes
and I nearly fainted.
‘I was sixteen years old and this was the first time I had been out of
the zenana; the greedy heat of the sun had not yet stolen the luscious
pink of my cheeks; but this was the first greeting I received from the
outside world, from my one idol in the world!’
My cigarette had gone out. All this time I had sat like a figure in a
painting – so engrossed that I knew not whether it was words or music
that I heard. I had said nothing myself. But now at last I burst out,
‘Animal!’
‘Animal?’ said the Nawab’s daughter. ‘Would a dying animal refuse a
drop of water?’
Embarrassed, I said, ‘Maybe not. He was a god, then.’
‘What sort of god?’ said the Princess. ‘Would a god reject the service
of an eager and devoted heart?’
‘Indeed not,’ I said, and fell silent again.
‘At first,’ continued the Princess, ‘I was devastated. I felt as if the world
had collapsed over my head. But I quickly recovered myself, bowed from
a distance before that harsh, cruel, high-minded Brahmin, and said to

myself, “O Brahmin, you accept neither the service of the wretched, nor
food from another’s hand, nor the gifts of the wealthy, nor the youth of a
girl, nor the love of a woman: you are separate, alone, aloof, distant. I
have no right at all to offer my soul to you.”
‘I cannot say what Keshar Lal thought when he saw the daughter of
the Nawab bowing down before him till her head touched the dust, but
there was no surprise or change of expression in his face. He looked at
me calmly; then, very slowly, stood up. I anxiously stretched out my arm
to support him, but he silently refused it, and with great difficulty
staggered to the bank of the Yamuna. A ferry was moored there. There
was no one to cross and no one to take anyone across. Keshar Lal
boarded the boat and untied the mooring-rope: the boat quickly drifted
to the middle of the stream and gradually faded from view. I longed with
all the force of my feelings, youth and unrequited devotion to make a
last obeisance before that boat and drown: to end this futile life of mine
in the waveless, moonlit Yamuna, in the still night, like a bud shed
before it could bloom.
‘But I could not do that. The moon in the sky, the dense black woods
on the bank, the inky-blue unruffled waters, the towers of our fortress
glittering above the mango-grove in the moonlight, sang together a
silent, solemn song of death; heaven, earth and the nether world that
night, by their moon-and-star-studded stillness, told me with one voice
to die. But a frail invisible boat, on the calm breast of the Yamuna,
dragged me from the moonlit night’s soothing, ever-bewitching spell of
death and back to the path of life. I followed the bank of the river like a
sleepwalker, sometimes through clumps of reeds, sometimes over
sandbanks, sometimes over rugged broken-up beaches, sometimes
through scarcely penetrable thickets.’
She fell silent here. I also said nothing. After a long pause the Nawab’s
daughter said, ‘What happened after this was very complicated. I don’t
know how to break it up and describe it clearly to you. I wandered
through a thick forest, but I can’t remember which path I took when.
Where shall I begin? Where shall I end? What shall I leave out? What
shall I keep in? How can I make the whole story clear so that it won’t
seem impossible or preposterous or unnatural?

‘During this period of my life I realized that nothing is impossible or
unattainable. To a young girl from a nawab’s zenana the outside world
might seem totally forbidding, but that is an illusion: if one once steps
out, a way through will be found. This path is not a nawab’s path; but it
is a path by which people have always come. It is rugged, weird and
uncharted, full of branchings and divisions, fraught with agony and
ecstasy, obstacles and obstructions; but it is a path.
‘An account of a princess’s long, solitary journey along this inevitable
path would not be pleasant to listen to, and even if it was I have no wish
to tell it. In a word, I endured many trials and dangers and indignities;
yet life was not unbearable. Like a firework, the more I burned the more
wildly I moved; so long as I kept moving I did not feel I was burning. But
now at last the flame of my pain and joy has gone out, and I find myself
lying like a dumb thing in the roadside dust. My journey is over; my
story is finished.’
With this the Nawab’s daughter stopped. I mentally shook my head: the
story was surely not yet over. I was silent for a while, then said in broken
Hindi, ‘Forgive my rudeness, but if you would speak a little more openly
about the last part of your story my impudent curiosity would be greatly
eased.’
The Nawab’s daughter smiled. No doubt my broken Hindi helped. If I
had been able to speak Hindi properly, she would not have been so frank
with me: the fact that I knew so little of her mother tongue created a
space between us, a protective veil.
She began again. ‘I often got news of Keshar Lal, but in no way could I
get to meet him. He had joined Tatya Tope’s army,1 and kept appearing
and disappearing like a bolt of thunder from a sky that was still dark
with revolt: sometimes to the east, sometimes to the west, sometimes to
the north-east, sometimes to the southwest.
‘I was by then dressed as a yoginī, and studying the Sanskrit Shastras
in Benares with Shibananda Swami, my spiritual father. News from all
over India reached him: I devotedly learnt the Shastras, and at the same
time eagerly lapped up news of the war.

‘Gradually the British Raj stamped out the flames of revolution in
Hindusthan. There was no more news of Keshar Lal. All the heroic
figures, right across India, who had been glimpsed in the bloody light of
battle, were eclipsed. I could hold myself no longer. I left the protection
of my guru, and went out in the world again, dressed as a devotee of
Shiva. I wandered from road to road, shrine to shrine, to ashrams and
temples, but found no news of Keshar Lal anywhere. Some who knew his
name said, “He must have died in the fighting or been executed.” My
heart said, “That can never be: Keshar Lal cannot die. He is a Brahmin;
that blazing invincible fire can never be put out; it is still burning
brightly on a lonely, remote, ritual hearth, waiting for me to sacrifice
myself to it.”
‘It is said in the Hindu Shastras that through meditation and austerity
a Shudra can become Brahmin; there is no mention of a Muslim
becoming a Brahmin, for the simple reason that there were no Muslims
at that time. I knew it would be a long time before I could be united
with Keshar Lal, because first I had to become a Brahmin. Thirty long
years went by. I became a Brahmin inside and out; in habit and
behaviour; in body, mind and speech. The blood of my Brahmin
grandmother flowed through my body with unmixed energy; I acquired
a strange mental fire, by abasing myself totally before the first and last
Brahmin of my adolescence and youth, for me the only Brahmin in the
world.
‘I had heard a lot about Keshar Lal’s heroism in the revolutionary war,
but that was not what imprinted itself on my heart. What I saw was
Keshar Lal floating out alone in a little boat into the calm central stream
of the Yamuna, in the silent moonlight: that was the picture that
obsessed me. I saw nothing but this, day and night: a Brahmin floating
away on the empty stream towards some undefined mystery – with no
companion, no servant, no need of anyone; immersed in the purity of his
soul, complete in himself; with the planets, moon and stars watching
him silently.
‘Then I heard that Keshar Lal had escaped execution and taken refuge
in Nepal. I went there. After living there for many months I heard that
he had left Nepal a long time before and had gone nobody knew where.
‘I wandered through the mountains. This was not a Hindu land: it was

a land of Bhutanese and Lepchas with their weird beliefs; there was no
orthodoxy in their diet and behaviour; their gods and styles of worship
were completely alien; I was terrified of the slightest desecration of the
holiness I had acquired through years of spiritual endeavour. I took great
pains to avoid being touched by anything unclean. I knew that my boat
was nearly at the shore, that my life’s supreme goal was not far off.
‘What shall I say of what happened next? The end of the story is very
brief. When a lamp is about to go out it can be extinguished with a
single puff. I need not elaborate. After thirty-eight years, I have arrived
in Darjeeling. I saw Keshar Lal this morning.’
She fell silent again, so I asked her eagerly, ‘What did you see?’
‘I saw,’ said the Nawab’s daughter, ‘an aged Keshar Lal in a Bhutanese
village with his Bhutanese wife, sitting in a filthy yard with their
grandchildren born of her, picking grain out of maize.’
Her story was finished. I thought I ought to offer some word of
consolation. ‘How can anyone,’ I said, ‘who has had to survive amidst
strangers for thirty-eight years, stick to his religious rules?’
‘You think I don’t understand that?’ said the Nawab’s daughter. ‘But
why was I so deluded for so long? Why didn’t I know that the
Brahminism that stole away my young heart was nothing but custom
and superstition? I thought it was dharma, unending and eternal. How
else could I – after being so shamefully rejected when I offered on that
moonlit night my freshly bloomed body and heart and soul, trembling
with devotion, after leaving my father’s house for the first time at the
age of sixteen – how else could I have silently accepted the insult as a
kind of initiation by a guru, and meekly dedicated myself to him with
redoubled devotion? Alas, Brahmin, you exchanged one set of habits for
another, but I gave away my life and youth, and how can I get them
back again?’
The woman stood up and said, ‘Namaskār, Babuji!’ Then a moment
later she said, as if correcting herself, ‘Salaam Babusaheb!’ With this
Muslim valediction she took her leave, as it were, of the Brahminism
whose foundations had crumbled to the dust. Before I could say
anything, she disappeared like a cloud into the mists that swirled round
these icy mountain-tops.

I shut my eyes for a while and let all she had described roll through
my mind. I saw the young, sixteen-year-old Nawab’s daughter sitting on
a fine carpet in her room overlooking the Yamuna; I saw the statuesque
figure of a yoginī rapt in ecstatic devotion during evening worship in a
place of pilgrimage; and then I saw also an image of heart-broken
disillusionment in an older woman, shrouded in mist, on the edge of the
Calcutta Road in Darjeeling; and the poignant music of beautiful, pure
Urdu, formed by the clash of Brahmin and Muslim blood flowing
through this woman in opposite ways, reverberated in my mind.1
I opened my eyes. The clouds had parted, and the clear sky was bright
with gentle sunshine. Englishwomen in hand-pushed carts and
Englishmen on horseback were out taking the air. There were one or two
Bengalis too, casting amused glances at me from faces swathed in
scarves.
I got up quickly, and in the bright light of this sunny world I could no
longer believe in the stormy story I had heard. My imagination had
made it up, out of mist mixed with ample tobacco-smoke. That MuslimBrahmin woman, that Brahmin hero, that fort on the bank of the
Yamuna, had perhaps no truth in them at all.

Son-sacrifice
Baidyanath was the shrewdest man in the village, and he always did
everything with an eye to the future. When he married, he had a clearer
vision of the son he hoped for than of the bride in front of him. So farsighted a look at the moment of the first unveiling has rarely been seen.1
He knew what he was about, and was therefore more concerned with the
offering of oblations after his death than he was with love. ‘One gets a
wife to have a son’: it was in this spirit that he married Binoda.
But even shrewd people can be cheated in this world. Though ripe for
child-bearing, Binoda failed in her chief duty, and Baidyanath grew very
alarmed when he saw the open gates of punnām-narak – the hell to
which men without sons are condemned. Worried about who would
inherit his wealth when he died, it became less of a pleasure to him now.
As I have said, the future was more real to him than the present.
But how could one expect the youthful Binoda to look so far ahead?
For her, poor girl, the worst thing was that her precious present life was
being wasted: her budding youth was withering away through lack of
love. The hunger of her heart in this world burned too strongly for her to
care about the hunger of the spirit in the next. The Holy Laws of Manu,
and her husband’s psychical exposition of them, gave no relief to her
craving.
Say what one may, at this age a woman finds her every joy in giving
and receiving love, and has a natural tendency to value it more than
duty. But instead of the delicate showers of new love, Fate decreed a
stinging, roaring hailstorm, poured down by her husband and his lofty
family hierarchy. They all accused her of being barren. Her wasted
youth wilted, like a flowering plant kept indoors away from light and
air.
Whenever she could bear the scolding and repression no longer, she
would go to Kusum’s house to play cards. She enjoyed this greatly. The
terrible shadow of damnation lifted for a while, and jokes and laughter
and chatter flowed freely. On days when Kusum had no female partner

for the game, she would call in her young brother-in-law Nagendra,
brushing aside any objection that either he or Binoda might make. Older
people know how one thing can lead to another, how a game can
become something more serious; but the young are not so aware of this.
Nagendra’s objections faded: soon he could hardly bear to wait for each
card-playing session.
It thus happened that Binoda and Nagendra started to meet each other
often, and he often now lost the game, because his eyes and mind were
on something more vital than cards. Kusum and Binoda were both well
aware of this (the real reason why he lost). As I have said, the young do
not understand the consequences of their actions. Kusum found it highly
amusing, and avidly watched the joke unfold. Young women delight in
secretly watering the seeds of love.
Neither was Binoda unwilling. For a woman to wish to sharpen her
weapons of conquest on a man may be wrong, but it is not unnatural. So
as the games were won and lost and the cards were shuffled and dealt,
the minds of two of the players came together in a way that only one
other (apart from God) saw – and enjoyed.
One day at noon Binoda, Kusum and Nagendra were playing cards.
After a while Kusum heard her young child (who was ill) crying, and
went out of the room. Nagendra kept on chatting to Binoda, but he had
no idea what he was saying: his heart galloped, and his blood surged
through every vessel in his body. Suddenly youthful passion broke
through the barriers of modesty: he seized Binoda’s arms, wrenched her
towards him, and kissed her. Shocked, angered, wounded, flustered by
this affront, Binoda struggled to get free – but suddenly they noticed a
third person in the room, a servant-woman. Nagendra looked at the
ground, searching for an escape-route.
‘Bauthākrun,’ said the woman in a grim voice, ‘your aunt is calling for
you.’ Tearfully, and with flashing glances at Nagendra, Binoda went out
with her.
The servant-woman soon raised a storm in Baidyanath’s house,
making light of what she had seen but greatly elaborating what she had
not. The plight that Binoda fell into is easier to imagine than to describe.
She did not try to defend her innocence to anyone; she merely bowed
her head.

Baidyanath, deciding that his chance of a son by her to offer funerary
oblations was now extremely remote, turned on her with the words:
‘Slut! Get out of my house.’
Binoda shut the door of her bedroom and lay on the bed, her tearless
eyes blazing like a desert in the afternoon. When it was dark, and the
crows in the garden stopped cawing, she looked up into the peaceful,
star-studded sky and thought of her mother and father; only then did
tears start to trickle down her cheeks.
That night, she left her husband’s house. No one tried to find her. She
did not know at that time that she had attained ‘woman’s greatest
fortune’: that her husband’s salvation in the next world was secure in her
womb.
Ten years passed, during which Baidyanath grew wealthier and
wealthier. He had now left the village and bought a large house in
Calcutta. But the more his wealth increased, the more anxious he
became about who would inherit it.
He made two more marriages, each of which led only to dissension,
not to a son. Soothsayers, healers and holy men filled his house: a stream
of roots, amulets, magic waters and patent medicines. If the bones of all
the goats he sacrificed at Kalighat had been piled high, they would have
dwarfed Tamburlaine’s victory-tower of skulls. But not even the tiniest of
babies – not even the tiniest bundle of bones and flesh – arrived to
inherit a corner of Baidyanath’s palatial estate. He could hardly eat for
worry about whose son it would be who would feed off his substance
after his death.
Baidyanath married yet again, because human hope has no limits, and
there is no shortage of parents with daughters to dispose of. Astrologers
examined the girl’s horoscope and pronounced that the auspicious
conjunctions therein were such that Baidyanath’s household would
quickly increase its numbers; but six years went by in which those
conjunctions failed to become active.
Baidyanath sank into despair. Finally, on the advice of pundits learned
in the Shastras, he prepared an enormously costly fertility rite.1 Scores of
Brahmins were fed in connection with it.

Meanwhile, widespread famine was reducing Bengal, Bihar and Orissa
to skin and bones. While Baidyanath sat amidst his abundant supplies
and worried about who would one day eat them, an entire famished
country looked at its empty platter and wondered what it would eat.
For four months Baidyanath’s fourth wife drank water in which a
hundred Brahmins had bathed their feet; and a hundred Brahmins,
eating gross lunches and monstrous suppers, filled the municipal
rubbish-carts with discarded earthenware cups and plates and bananaleaves smeared with curd and ghee. At the smell of the food, starving
people crowded round the doors. Extra guards were employed to drive
them away.
One morning, in Baidyanath’s marble mansion, a pot-bellied sannyāsi
was being served with two seers of mohanbhog and one-and-a-half seers
of milk; and Baidyanath was watching this holy meal, sitting on the
ground humbly and piously, hands clasped, chadar over his shoulder. An
extremely thin woman with her emaciated child entered the room – she
had somehow evaded the guards – and said piteously, ‘Babu, give us a
bite to eat.’
Baidyanath, in a flurry, shouted for his servant, ‘Gurudoyal,
Gurudoyal!’ Fearing the worst, the woman said pathetically, ‘Can’t you
give the child something? I don’t want anything.’
Gurudoyal came and chased off the woman and her little boy. That
starving unfed boy was Baidyanath’s only son. A hundred well-nourished
Brahmins and three stout sannyāsīs, enticing Baidyanath with the faint
prospect of a son, went on guzzling his supplies.

The Hungry Stones
I went away during the pūjā holiday, touring the country with a
theosophist relative. It was on the train back to Calcutta that we met the
man. He was a Bengali Babu, but his dress made us think at first that he
was a Muslim from Northern India – and his conversation was even more
surprising. He spoke on every subject with such authority, that one
might have taken him for God’s personal adviser. We had been quite
content not to know about the world’s secret happenings: how far the
Russians had advanced, what the British were plotting, or the bungling
machinations of the Native States. But our informant said with a slight
smile, ‘There happen more things in heaven and earth, Horatio, than are
reported in your newspapers.’ It was the first time we had been away
from home, so the man’s whole style was a revelation to us. He could
jump, at the drop of a hat, from science to the Veda to recitations of
Persian couplets; having no such command ourselves, we admired him
more and more. So much so, that my theosophist relative grew sure
there was supernatural aura around the man – a strange sort of
magnetism, a divine power, an astral body, or something of that sort. He
listened to every little thing he said with rapt attention, and made
surreptitious notes. I suspected that our strange companion was not
unaware of this, and was rather flattered.
The train came to a junction, and we sat in a waiting-room for a
connection. It was half past ten at night. We heard that some kind of
disruption on the line had delayed the train badly. I decided to spread
my bed-roll out on the table and get some sleep, but it was then that the
man began the following story. I got no more sleep that night…
‘Because of some disagreements over policy, I left my employ in the state
of Junagar and entered the service of the Nizam of Hyderabad. I was
young and sturdy at that time, so I was first of all given the job of
collecting the cotton-tax at Barich.
‘Barich is a most romantic place. The Shusta river there (the name is

derived from the Sanskrit svacchatoyā1) flows through large forests with
desolate mountains above, snaking its pebbly way over rocks like a
skilful dancer picking her feet. A white marble palace stands alone on
high rocks beneath the mountains, with 150 steep stone steps leading up
from the river. There is no other house near by. The village of Barich
with its cotton-market is a long way off.
‘About 250 years ago Shah Mahmud II built the palace as a private
pleasure-dome. In those days there were rose-scented fountains in the
bathrooms: young Persian concubines sat in seclusion on cool marble,
with their hair unplaited for bathing, dipping their soft, naked feet in
pools of pure water, sitars in their laps, singing vineyard ghazals. Those
fountains play no longer, the songs are heard no more, fair feet no
longer fall on white stone: there is no one to inhabit the palatial
emptiness of the place but a single, lonely tax-collector. But the old clerk
in the office, Karim Khan, told me over and over again not to live there.
“If you want, go there during the day,” he said, “but don’t ever spend a
night.” I scoffed at him. The servants, likewise, were willing to work
there till dusk, but not to sleep there. “Suit yourselves,” I said. The
building had such a bad name that even thieves didn’t venture there at
night.
‘At first the desolation of the palace oppressed me like a weight on my
chest. I kept away from it as much as I could, working continuously,
returning exhausted to my room to sleep. But after a few weeks, it began
to exert a strange attraction. It is difficult to describe my state of mind
and equally hard to convince people of it. The whole building seemed
alive: it was sucking me in, its powerful stomach-juices were digesting
me slowly. Probably it started to work on me from the moment I first set
foot in it, but I clearly remember the day when I first became conscious
of its power.
‘It was the beginning of the summer: the market was sluggish, and I
had little work to do. I had sat down in a comfortable chair by the river
at the bottom of the steps, a little before sunset. The Shusta was
depleted; its many sandbanks opposite were ruddy in the afternoon light;
near me, pebbles glittered in the clear, shallow water at the bottom of
the steps. There was not a breath of wind. The scent of wild basil,
spearmint and aniseed in the hillside woods made the air oppressive.

‘When the sun went down behind the crags, a long shadow fell, like a
curtain abruptly ending the drama of the day. Here in this cleft between
mountains there was no real dusk, no mingling of light and dark. I was
about to mount my horse and ride away, when I heard footsteps on the
stairway. I turned round – but there was no one there.
‘Thinking that my senses were deceiving me, I settled in my chair
again; but now lots of footsteps could be heard – as if a crowd of people
were rushing down the steps together. Slight fear mixed with a peculiar
pleasure filled my body. Even though there was no physical presence
before me, I had a clear impression of a crowd of jubilant women
rushing down the steps this summer evening to bathe in the Shusta.
There was no actual sound this evening on the silent slopes and riverbank, or inside the empty palace, but I could none the less hear bathers
passing me, chasing one another with merry laughter like the waters of a
spring. They didn’t seem to notice me. I was as invisible to them as they
were to me. The river was as undisturbed as before, but I had a clear
feeling that its shallow stream was being ruffled by jingling, braceleted
arms, that friends were splashing each other and shrieking with
laughter, that kicking swimmers were scattering spray like fistfuls of
pearls.
‘I felt a kind of trembling in my chest: I can’t say if the feeling was of
fear or delight or curiosity. I longed to see what was happening, but
there was nothing in front of me to see. I felt that if I strained to listen, I
would hear all that was spoken – but when I did try to listen, I only
heard scraping crickets! I felt that a 250-year-old black curtain was
dangling in front of me; if only I could lift one corner and peer behind it,
what a splendid royal scene would be revealed! But in the deep darkness
nothing could be seen.
‘Suddenly the sultriness of the air was broken by a sharp gust of wind:
the calm Shusta shook like the tresses of a nymph, and the whole
shadowy forest stirred as if waking from a bad dream. Whether dream or
not, the invisible pageant from a world of 250 years ago was whisked
away in a trice. The magic women who brushed past me with bodiless
footsteps and noiseless laughter to jump into the Shusta did not return
up the steps, wringing the water from their clothes. The spring breeze
blew them away like a scent, in a single gust.

‘Had the ruinous Goddess of Poetry landed on my shoulders, finding
me all on my own? Had she come to clobber me, for being such a slave
to tax-collection? I decided I had better eat: an empty stomach can play
havoc with one’s health. I called my cook and ordered a full, spicy
Moglai meal, swimming in ghee.
‘The next morning the whole affair seemed ridiculous. I cheerfully
trundled about, driving my pony-trap myself, wearing a pith helmet like
a sāheb, making routine inquiries. I had my tri-monthly report to write,
so I meant to stay late at my office. But as soon as it was dusk, I found
myself drawn to the palace. I cannot say who was drawing me; but I felt
it unwise to delay. I felt I was expected. Instead of completing my report,
I put on my helmet again and returned to the huge, rock-bound palace,
disturbing the deserted, shadowy path with my rattling pony-trap’s
wheels.
‘The room at the top of the steps was immense. Its huge decorated,
vaulted ceiling rested on three rows of pillars. It echoed all the time with
its own emptiness. Evening was well-advanced, but no lamps had been
lit. As I pushed open the door and entered that vast room, I felt a
tremendous upheaval, like a court breaking up – people dispersing
through doors, windows, rooms, passages, verandahs. I stood astonished;
there was nothing I could see. I shuddered, went gooseflesh all over. A
lingering scent of age-old shampoo and ātar caught my nostrils. I stood
in the gloom between the pillars, and heard all round me the gush of
fountains on stone, the sound of a sitar (but what the tune was I did not
know), the tinkle of gold ornaments, the jingle of anklets, the noise of a
gong striking the hour, a distant ālāp on a sānāi, the chinking of
chandeliers swinging in the breeze, the song of a caged nightingale on
the verandah, the cry of tame cranes in the gardens: all combining to
create the music of the dead. I was transfixed: I felt that this impalpable,
unreal scene was the only truth in the world, that everything else was a
mirage. Was I really the Honourable Mr So-and-So, eldest son of the late
Mr So-and-So, earning 450 rupees a month for collecting cotton-taxes?
Did I really wear a pith helmet and short kurta, drive a pony-trap to the
office? It seemed so odd and absurd and false, that I burst out laughing
as I stood in that great, dark room.
‘My Muslim servant then came in with a flaming kerosene lamp. I

don’t know whether he thought I was mad – but I suddenly remembered
that I was the Honourable Mr So-and-So, eldest son of the late Mr Soand-So. Our great poets and artists could maybe say whether
disembodied fountains played eternally in this world or somewhere
outside it, or whether endless rāgas were plucked on a magic sitar by
invisible fingers, but this was true for sure, that I earned 450 rupees a
month collecting taxes in the Barich cotton-market! Sitting at my lamplit
camp-table with my newspaper, I recalled my strange hallucination of a
little while ago, and laughed boisterously.
‘I finished the newspaper, ate my Moglai food, turned out the lamp,
and lay down in my small corner bedroom. Through the open window in
front of me, a brilliant star above the darkly wooded Arali hills looked
down from millions and millions of miles away at the Honourable Taxcollector on his measly camp-bed. I cannot say when I fell asleep,
reflecting on the wonder and absurdity of that. And I don’t know how
long I slept. But suddenly I awoke with a start – not that there was any
sound in the room, or any person that I could see. The bright star had set
behind the dark hills, and the thin light of the new moon shone wanly
through my window as if afraid to enter. I couldn’t see anyone. But I
seemed to feel someone gently pushing me. I sat up; whoever it was said
nothing, but five ring-studded fingers pressed me firmly to follow.
‘I stood up gingerly. Although there was not a soul but me in that
palace with its hundreds of rooms and immense emptiness, where sound
slept and only echoes were awake, I still walked in fear of waking
someone. Most of the rooms in the palace were kept closed, and I had
never been in them before; so I cannot say where and by which route I
went that night, following with soundless steps and bated breath that
urgent, unseen guide! I couldn’t keep track of the narrow dark passages,
the long verandahs, the huge solemn audience-chambers, the airless and
obscure cells.
‘Although I could not see my guide with my eyes, I had an image of
her in my mind. She was an Arab woman, whose marble-white hands
emerged from voluminous sleeves – hard and flawless hands. A fine veil
hung down from her head-dress; a curved knife was tied to her waist. It
was as if a night had come floating from One Thousand and One Nights. I
felt I was making my way through the narrow unlit alleyways of sleeping

Baghdad, towards some dangerous assignation.
‘At last my guide stopped before a dark blue curtain and seemed to
point to something underneath. There was nothing there, but the blood
in my chest froze with fear. In front of the curtain a fearsome African
eunuch sat with drawn sword in his lap, legs sprawled out, dozing. The
guide tiptoed over his legs and lifted a corner of the curtain. Behind it
was a room spread with Persian carpets: I could not see who was sitting
on the couch, but I saw two feet lazily resting on a pink velvet footstool,
beautiful feet in brocade slippers peeping out of loose saffron pyjamas.
On the floor near by was a bluish crystal bowl with apples, pears,
oranges and grapes; and next to this there were two small goblets and a
glass decanter of golden wine ready for a guest. From within the room, a
strange intoxicating incense enthralled me.
‘I was nerving myself to step over the sprawled legs of the eunuch, but
he suddenly woke – his sword fell on to the stone floor with a clatter.
There was then a horrible yell, and I found myself sitting on my campbed, soaked with sweat. It was dawn: the thin moon was pale as a
sleepless invalid, and our local madman, Meher Ali, was walking as
usual down the empty early-morning road shouting, “Keep away, keep
away!”
‘My first Arabian Night ended in this way – but a thousand more
nights were to follow. A gulf between my days and my nights developed.
During the day I would go about my work in a state of exhaustion,
cursing my nights with their empty delusions and dreams; but at night it
was my work-bound existence that seemed trivial, false and ridiculous.
After dark I lived in a trance, in a maze of intoxication. I took on a
strange alter ego, hidden in an unwritten history of hundreds of years
ago. My short English jacket and tight trousers ill-befitted that person.
So I dressed very carefully in baggy pyjamas, flower-patterned kurta, red
velvet fez, a long silk choga; I perfumed my handkerchief with ātar;
instead of cigarettes I smoked an enormous many-coiled hubble-bubble
filled with rose-water; I sat in a large cushioned kedārā – waiting, it
seemed, for a grand romantic tryst. But as darkness thickened a weird
thing happened which I cannot describe. It was as if some torn pages
from a marvellous story were blown by a sudden spring breeze to flutter
around the various rooms of that vast palace. They could be followed so

far, but never right to the end. I spent my nights wandering from room
to room chasing those swirling torn pages.
‘Amidst the swirling, tattered dreams, the whiffs of henna, the
snatches of sitar-music, the gusts of wind spattered with scented water, I
caught from time to time, like flashes of lightning, glimpses of a
beautiful woman. She was dressed in saffron pyjamas; brocade sandals
curving at the toe on her soft pink feet; a richly embroidered bodice
tight round her breast; a red cap on her head with a fringe of golden
tassels framing her forehead and cheeks. She made me mad. I spent my
nethermost dreams each night wandering through the streets and
dwellings of an intricate fantasy realm, in quest of her.
‘On some evenings, I would light two lamps either side of a large
mirror and carefully dress myself like a prince. Suddenly next to my own
reflection in the mirror, the spectre of that same Persian girl appeared
for a moment. She would bend her neck and direct her deep black eyes
at me, full of a fierce, plaintive passion, while unspoken phrases hovered
on her moist, beautiful lips. Then, nimbly twisting her buxom body
round and up in a light and exquisite dance, she would vanish into the
mirror – smile, gaze, ornaments, pain, longing, confusion flashing like a
shower of sparks – whereupon a wild gust of wind, scented with
woodland plunder, blew out my two lamps. I would undress and stretch
myself on the bed next to my dressing-room, eyes closed, tingling with
delight. The air all around me – laden with mixed scents from the Arali
hills – swam with kisses and caresses; the touch of soft hands seemed to
fill the secretive dark. I felt murmurs in my ear, perfumed breath on my
brow, and the end of a delicate veil fragrantly brushing my cheeks.
Ravishing, serpentine coils seemed to grip me ever more tightly – until,
with a heavy sigh, limp with fatigue, I sank into deep slumber.
‘One afternoon I decided to ride out – someone told me not to, I forget
who, but I insisted on going. My sāheb’s hat and jacket were hanging on
a wooden hook: I snatched them and was going to put them on, but a
tremendous whirlwind, sweeping before it sand from the Shusta banks
and dry leaves from the Arali hills, whisked them away from me, and a
sweet peal of laughter, hitting every note of mirth, driven higher and
higher up the scale by the wind, soared to where the sun sets, and
spiralled away.

‘I did not go riding that day; and from then on I gave up wearing the
short jacket and sāheb’s hat that had been so ridiculed. That night I sat
up in bed and heard someone groaning and wailing: beneath the bed,
under the floor, from within a dark tomb in the stone foundations of the
palace, someone was crying, “Release me; break down the doors of futile
fantasy, deep slumber, cruel illusion; lift me on to your horse, press me
to your breast, carry me away through forests, over mountains, over
rivers to your daylit abode!”
‘Who was I? How could I rescue her? Which lovely, drowning
projection of desire should I drag ashore from a whirlpool of swirling
dreams? Divinely beautiful, where and when did you live? By which cool
spring, and in which palm-shade, and to which desert nomad were you
born? To which slave-market were you taken to be sold, crossing hot
sands, riding on a lightning horse, torn from your mother’s lap by a
Bedouin brigand, like a flower from a wild creeper? Which royal servant
studied your blooming bashful beauty, counted out gold mudrās, took
you overseas, placed you in a golden palanquin, gave you to his master’s
harem? What was your story there? Amidst the sāraṅgī-music, the
tinkling anklets, the cruelly glittering wine, did there not lurk the flash
of daggers, the bite of poisons, the savagery of covert glances! Unlimited
wealth; eternal imprisonment! Two maids either side of you, waving flywhisks, diamond bracelets twinkling! Kings and princes sprawling before
the jewel-and-pearl-studded slippers encasing your fair feet! At the
entrance-door, a Negro like Hell’s messenger but in Heaven’s garb,
standing with sword unsheathed! Did you, O desert-flower, float away
on that stream of wealth so horribly gleaming, so fraught with
conspiracy, foaming with envy and smirched with blood, to meet a cruel
death or to land on an even more regal, even more abominable shore?
‘Suddenly Meher Ali, the madman, was shouting, “Keep away, keep
away! All is false! All is false!” I saw that it was dawn; the chaprassi was
giving me the mail; the cook was salaaming and asking what he should
cook today. “No,” I announced, “I can’t stay in this palace any more.”
That very day I moved all my things to the office. The old clerk Karim
Khan smiled slightly when he saw me. Annoyed at his smile, I said
nothing to him and settled down to my work.
‘As the day wore on, the more distracted I became. I wondered what

point there was in going anywhere. Tax-assessment seemed pointless; the
Nizam and his government meant little; everything coming and going
and happening around me was wretched, worthless, senseless!
‘I threw aside my pen, slammed my ledger shut, and quickly climbed
into my pony-trap. As if of its own accord it took me to the palace,
arriving as dusk fell. I rapidly climbed the steps and went in.
‘Today everything was still. The dark rooms seemed sullen. My heart
was swelling with repentance, but nowhere was there anyone to speak
to, anyone to ask for forgiveness. I roamed around the dark rooms
blankly. I wished I could find a musical instrument, sing a song to
someone. I would have sung, “O fire, the insect that tried to flee you has
returned to die. Have pity on it now, burn its wings, shrivel it to ashes.”
Suddenly two tears fell on my forehead from above. That day thick
clouds had gathered over the Arali hills. The dark forest and the inky
Shusta seemed paralysed with dread. But now, water and land and sky
shuddered; and a lightning-fanged storm unleashed itself through distant
trackless forests, roaring and howling and rushing hither. Doors in the
palace slammed; huge empty rooms boomed with a note of despair.
‘The servants were all at the office; there was no one to light the
lamps. I distinctly felt, on that cloudy moonless night, in the jet-black
darkness of the rooms, that a woman was lying facedown on a carpet at
the foot of a bed, tearing her unkempt hair with tight-clenched fists;
blood was pouring from her pale brow; sometimes she was laughing
fiercely and hysterically; sometimes she was sobbing wildly; she had
ripped off her bodice and was beating her naked breasts; the wind was
roaring through the window, driving in rain that soaked her to the skin.
‘The storm went on all night, and the weeping too. I went on
wandering through pitch-black rooms in fruitless remorse. There was no
one anywhere; no one whom I could comfort. Who was it who was so
distressed? Where was this inconsolable grief coming from?
‘Once again the madman was shouting, “Keep away! Keep away! All is
false! All is false!” I saw that it was dawn, and Meher Ali even on this
storm-swept day was circling the palace shouting his usual cry. I
wondered now if Meher Ali too had at one time lived in this palace; even
though he was mad now and lived outside, he was daily lured by its
monstrous stony charm, and every morning came to walk round it. I

immediately ran up to the madman through the rain and asked, “Meher
Ali, what is false?”
‘He gave no answer, pushed me aside and, like a wheeling bird
transfixed by the leer of a huge snake, continued to shout and wander
round the palace, continued to warn himself over and over again with all
his might, “Keep away! Keep away! All is false!”
‘Dashing through the rain and storm like a man possessed, I returned
to the office. I called Karim Khan and said, “Tell me what all of this
means.”
‘The gist of what he told me was this. Once upon a time the palace
had been churned by insatiable lust, by the flames of wild pleasure.
Cursed by those passions, those vain desires, every stone now hungered
and thirsted, strove like a vampire to consume every soul who came
near. Of those who had stayed for more than three nights in the palace,
only Meher Ali had emerged, with his wits gone. No one else till now
had escaped its grasp.
‘I asked, “Is there no escape for me?”
‘The old man answered, “There is only one way and that is very hard.
I can tell it to you, but first I must tell you the ancient story of one who
lived there, a Persian slave-girl. A stranger and sadder tale was never
heard.” ’
At that moment, the coolies came and told us that the train was coming.
So soon? We rolled up our bedding, and the train arrived. A sleepy
Englishman stuck his head out of a first-class compartment to read the
name of the station. ‘Hello,’ he shouted, recognizing our companion, and
he let him into his carriage. We got into the second class. We never
found out who the gentleman was, and we never heard the end of the
story either.
I said, ‘The fellow took us for fools and was pulling our legs; he made
the whole thing up.’ My theosophist relative disagreed, and our dispute
caused a rift which was never healed.

Thoughtlessness
I had to leave my homestead. I shall not tell you directly how this
happened, only indirectly.
I was the native doctor in the village, and my house was opposite the
police station. I was as intimate with the Police Inspector as I was with
Death – aware, therefore, of the torments inflicted on humanity by Man
and by his Protector.1 And just as jewels and bangles, worn together,
enhance each other, so the Inspector drew financial benefit from my
interventions and I from his.
Yes, my friendship with Lalit Chakrabarti, Police Inspector,
experienced fixer, was very special. It made me almost as vulnerable to
his repeated suggestion that I and a spinster relative of his should marry
as she was herself. But I could not bear to subject Shashi, my only
daughter, motherless though she was, to a stepmother. Every year
moments defined by the almanac as auspicious for a wedding passed by.
I watched many worthy and not so worthy grooms climb into
palanquins, and all I could do was join the groom’s party, eat weddingfeasts in other people’s houses, and return home with a sigh.
Shashi was twelve – nearly thirteen. I’d had some indication from a
certain well-placed family that if I could get together a decent sum of
money, I’d be able to marry her into it. And if that could be
accomplished, I would then turn my attention to my own matrimonial
arrangements.
I was brooding one day over this pressing need for money, when
Harinath Majumdar of Tulsi village came to me in a state of desperation.
What had happened was that his widowed daughter had suddenly died
in the night, and enemies of his had written letters to the Police
Inspector insinuating that she had died from an abortion. The police now
wanted to examine her dead body.
The shame of this on top of his grief for his dead daughter was more
than he could bear. I was a doctor, and a friend of the Inspector: surely I
could do something?

When the Goddess of Prosperity wishes to call, she comes sometimes
through the front door, sometimes through the back. I shook my head
and said, ‘I’m afraid it’s a complex matter.’ I cited a couple of bogus
precedents, and the trembling old Harinath wept like a child.
To cut a long story short, Harinath had to beggar himself in order to
give his daughter her proper funeral rites.
My daughter Shashi came to me and asked me pitifully, ‘Father, why
did that old man come and weep before you like that?’
‘Run along,’ I said crossly. ‘That’s no business of yours.’
The path to finding a groom to whom I could give my daughter was
now smoothed. The wedding-date was fixed. She being my only
daughter, I planned the wedding-feast elaborately. I had no wife, so kind
neighbours helped me. The penniless but grateful Harinath laboured for
me night and day.
On the eve of the wedding – the day when bride and bridegroom are
dabbed with turmeric – at three in the morning, Shashi suddenly went
down with cholera, and quickly grew worse and worse. After every
effort, after hurling bottle upon bottle of useless medicine to the ground,
I rushed to Harinath and fell on my knees before him. ‘Forgive me,
Dādā,’ I cried. ‘Forgive me for my sin! She is my only daughter. I have
no one else.’
‘What are you doing, Doctor Babu, what are you doing?’ said
Harinath, greatly perplexed. ‘I shall always be indebted to you! Don’t
kneel before me!’
‘I ruined you, though you had done nothing wrong,’ I said. ‘Because of
my sin, my daughter is dying.’
I started to shout to everyone, ‘Oh, I ruined this old man, and am
being punished for it! God, God, save my Shashi!’
I seized Harinath’s sandal and started beating myself on the head with
it. The old man, greatly embarrassed, snatched it back from me.
The next day at ten o’clock, with the turmeric still on her, Shashi bid
farewell for ever to this world.
The very next day after that, the Inspector said, ‘Well, why don’t you
get married now? You need someone to look after you.’
This kind of callous disrespect for a man’s grief would have shamed

even the Devil! But I had fallen in with the Inspector on so many other
occasions that I could not bring myself to speak. How my friendship with
him stung and shamed me now!
However pained the heart, life has to go on. One has to turn one’s full
energy again to the normal effort of finding food to eat, clothes to wear,
wood for the stove, laces for one’s shoes. In intervals from work, when I
sat alone in my house, I would sometimes hear in my ear that pitiful
question, ‘Father, why was that old man weeping before you?’ I
rethatched Harinath’s tumbledown house at my own expense, gave him
my own milch-cow, and redeemed his plot of land from the moneylender.
Unbearably grief-stricken, alone in the evenings and sleepless at night,
I could not stop thinking: ‘My tender-hearted daughter – even though
she has escaped this life – has found no peace in the next world from her
father’s cruel misdeeds. She seems to keep on returning in distress,
asking, “Father, why did you do that?” ’
For a while I was in such a state that I found it impossible to ask poor
people for fees for medical treatment. If any young girl was ill, I felt it
was my Shashi who was ill by proxy; I saw her in all the sick girls in the
village.
The village was now awash with heavy rain. Fields and houses could
be reached only by boat. The rain started early in the morning and went
on all day.
A call came to me from the zamindar’s office. The zamindar’s boatman
would not stand any delay and was agitating to leave at once.
Formerly, when I had to go out in such weather, there had been
someone to open my ancient umbrella for me and see if there were any
holes in it; and an anxious voice would ask me over and over again to be
careful to protect myself from the damp wind and lashings of rain.
Today as I looked for my umbrella in the empty, silent house, I paused
for a moment to recall her loving face. I looked at her closed bedroom
and wondered why God had arranged – for a person who gave no
thought to the sorrows of others – such a supply of love. As I passed the
door of that empty room, I felt a deep ache in my chest. But then, at the
sound of the zamindar’s servant irascibly shouting for me, I quickly
suppressed my grief and went outside.

As I climbed into the boat I saw a small canoe tied to the policestation ghāt, with a farmer in it, soaking wet, wearing only a loincloth. I
asked him what was up, and he told me that last night his daughter had
been bitten by a snake – the wretched man had had to come all the way
from a distant village to report it. I could see he had taken off his only
garment to cover the dead body.
The impatient boatman from the zamindar’s office untied the rope and
we set off. At one o’clock I returned to my house and saw that the man
was still sitting, soaked, with his knees huddled up to his chin; the
Inspector Babu had not yet appeared. I sent him part of my midday
meal. He refused to touch it.
After eating quickly I again had to set out to see the patient in the
zamindar’s office. In the evening when I returned the fellow was still
sitting, in a nearly catatonic state. When I questioned him he was
scarcely able to reply; he just stared at me. This river, village and police
station; this drenched, cloudy, muddy world; to him it was as hazy as a
dream. By repeated questioning I learnt that a constable had come out
once to ask him if he had any money tucked into the loincloth. He had
told him he was very poor – he had nothing. The constable had said,
‘Wait, you rogue, sit and wait.’
I had often seen sights like this before, and never thought anything of
them. But today I could not stand it. My Shashi’s plaintive, silenced
voice seemed to throb through the entire rainy sky. This speechless,
daughterless farmer’s unendurable grief seemed to beat against my own
ribs.
The Inspector Babu was sitting comfortably on a wicker stool,
smoking a hookah. An uncle – the one who had a daughter to dispose of
– had recently arrived with me in mind: he was sitting on a mat and
chatting. I burst in on them like a storm. I bellowed at them, ‘Are you
men or monsters?’ and banged my whole day’s earnings down in front of
them saying, ‘If you want money, take this: go to hell with it. Give that
fellow outside a break now. Let him cremate his daughter.’
The love between the doctor and the Inspector, which the tears and
torments of many others had nourished, crashed to the ground in that
storm.
Not long after, I myself was on my knees before the Inspector, praising

his greatness and bewailing my own stupidity; but I still had to leave my
homestead.

The Gift of Sight
I have heard that these days many Bengali girls have to find their
husbands through their own efforts. I have also had to find mine, but
God has helped me. Maybe this is because of my many vows and pūjās to
Shiva, from an early age. I was not yet eight years old when I was
married. But my sins in an earlier life stopped me from acquiring my
husband fully. Three-eyed Mother Durga took away my two eyes. For the
whole of the rest of my life she denied me the pleasure of seeing my
husband.
My baptism of fire began in childhood. Before I was fourteen years old
I gave birth to a dead baby, and I myself came close to death. But if a
person is fated to suffer sorrow, she is not allowed to die too soon. A
lamp that is meant to burn long has to have enough oil: it mustn’t go out
until night is over. I survived my illness, true, but whether through
physical weakness, or mental distress, or for whatever reason, my eyes
were affected.
My husband was at that time studying to be a doctor. With all the
enthusiasm of a student, he leapt at a chance to try out his medical
knowledge. He began to treat my eyes himself. My elder brother was at
college that year, studying for his BL. He came to my husband one day
and said, ‘What are you doing? You’ll destroy Kusum’s eyes. Let a really
good doctor examine her.’
‘If a good doctor came,’ said my husband, ‘what new treatment could
he give? I know about all the available medicines.’
My brother grew angry and said, ‘So I suppose there is no difference
between you and the top man at your college?’
‘You are studying law,’ said my husband. ‘What do you know of
medicine? When you get married, and have to go to law, say, over your
wife’s property, will you come to me for advice?’
‘When kings fight,’ I said to myself, ‘ordinary folk had best keep out of
the way. My husband is quarrelling with Dādā, but I’m the one who will
pay for it.’ I also felt that since I’d been given away in marriage, my

brother and his friends no longer had a right to intervene. My sorrow
and happiness, health and sickness were all in the hands of my husband.
Relations between my husband and brother became rather strained
over this small matter of medical treatment. My flow of tears, already
copious, now became even heavier – with neither my husband nor my
brother understanding the true reason.
One afternoon when my husband was at college my brother suddenly
appeared with a doctor. The doctor examined me and said that if care
were not taken my eye-condition might get worse. He prescribed a new
set of medicines, which my brother immediately sent someone to fetch.
When the doctor had gone I said, ‘Dādā, I beg you, don’t interfere with
the treatment I am following at the moment.’
I had been in awe of my brother ever since childhood: to speak to him
so bluntly was an odd thing for me to do. But I knew well that no good
would come of the treatment that my brother had arranged behind my
husband’s back. My brother, too, was probably surprised at my boldness.
He was silent for a while, then said, ‘All right, I shan’t bring a doctor
again, but please try the medicines that are on their way.’ When the
medicines arrived, my brother explained how I should use them, and
then left. Before my husband returned from college, I took the bottles,
pill-box, brush and instructions and carefully disposed of them in the
well in the courtyard of our house.
As if out of grudge towards my brother, my husband now treated my
eyes with redoubled vigour. He changed medicines from one day to the
next. I wore blinkers over my eyes, or spectacles; I put drops into them,
or smeared them with powder; I even put up with the foul-smelling fishoil he gave me to swallow and which made me want to vomit. My
husband would ask me how I was feeling and I would say, ‘Much better.’
I even tried to persuade myself that my tears were a good sign; when the
streaming stopped I decided I was on the road to recovery. But before
long the pain was unendurable. My vision was blurred, and I was
writhing with headache. I could see that even my husband was
downcast. He was finding it difficult to think of a pretext for calling a
doctor after so long.
‘To set my brother’s mind at rest,’ I said, ‘what harm would there be
in calling a doctor? He’s becoming so unreasonably angry – it’s upsetting

me. You can carry on treating me, but a doctor can be brought in too,
for form’s sake.’
‘That’s a good idea,’ said my husband. That very day he returned with
an English doctor. I don’t know what exactly was said, but it seemed
that the sāheb gave my husband quite a scolding – for he stood silently,
hanging his head. When the doctor had gone, I took my husband’s hand
and said, ‘Why did you bring that conceited white-skinned ass? A native
doctor would have done. Why should that man understand my eyecondition better than you?’
‘It has become necessary to operate on your eyes,’ said my husband
nervously.
I made a show of anger and said, ‘If an operation is necessary, why
did you not tell me so at the beginning? Did you think I was scared?’
My husband became more confident again, and said, ‘How many men
are so heroic that they wouldn’t be scared at the prospect of having their
eyes cut open?’
‘Maybe they’re only heroic to their wives,’ I said jokingly.
‘You’re right,’ said my husband, turning suddenly pale and solemn.
‘Men are essentially driven by vanity.’
I dismissed his solemnity by saying, ‘Do you want to match us in
vanity too? We have the edge over you even in that.’
Meanwhile my brother had come, and I called him aside to say, ‘Dādā,
by following all this time what the doctor of yours prescribed, my eyes
have been getting much better, but by mistake the other day I smeared
on to my eyes the medicine which I should have swallowed, and they’ve
started to go fuzzy again. My husband says I shall have to have an
operation.’
‘I thought you were following your husband’s treatment,’ said my
brother. ‘I was annoyed, that’s why I haven’t been to see you.’
‘No,’ I said, ‘I’ve secretly been following that doctor’s prescription. I
didn’t tell my husband, in case he got angry.’
What lies women have to tell! I couldn’t upset my brother, and I
couldn’t damage my husband’s self-esteem either. A mother has to
beguile her child; a wife has to keep her husband happy – women have
to stoop to so many deceptions! But the result of my ploy was that

before I finally became blind I was able to see a reconciliation between
my husband and brother. My brother supposed that the damage was
done by the treatment he arranged secretly; my husband felt that it
would have been better to have listened to my brother’s advice from the
beginning. They both felt guilty, and thus longed for forgiveness and
drew very close to each other. My husband came to my brother for
guidance, and my brother sought my husband’s opinion on all matters.
At last they mutually agreed to call an English doctor to come and
operate on my left eye. In its weakened state, it failed to withstand the
shock of surgery, and its dim remaining light went out. After that the
other eye also little by little faded into darkness. A curtain was drawn
forever over the sandal-decorated youthful image I had first seen in
childhood, standing in front of me at the moment of the śubhadṛṣṭi.1
One day my husband came to my bedside and said, ‘I shall not try to
bamboozle you any more. It was I who destroyed your eyes.’
I could tell from his voice that he was close to tears. I pressed his right
hand with both my hands and said, ‘Don’t worry, you took what
belonged to you. Suppose my eyes had been destroyed by some other
doctor’s treatment – what comfort would there have been in that? If it
was inevitable that no one could save my eyes, the one consolation of
my blindness is that my eyes were taken by you. When he had
insufficient flowers for a pūjā Rama tore out his own eyes and offered
them to God. I too have given my eyes to a god – I have given to you my
light of the full moon, my morning sunshine, my blue of the sky, my
green of the earth. Describe to me anything you see that pleases you. I
shall receive from you the grace of your gift of sight.’
I was not able to say all this – I could not find the words for it; but I
had felt these things for a long time. Sometimes when weariness
overcame me, when my faith started to ebb, when I started to regard
myself as deprived or tragic or unfortunate, then I would speak to myself
in these terms: I would try to lift myself out of my depression by relying
on this solace, this devotion. That day, partly by what I said, partly by
what I was not able to say, I think I conveyed my feelings to him. He
said in turn, ‘Kumu, I can never give you back what I destroyed through
my stupidity, but as far as I am able I shall make up for your loss of sight
by staying by you.’

‘There is no point in that,’ I said. ‘I shall never allow you to make your
home a hospital for the blind. You must marry again.’
I was just about to explain in detail why it was so necessary for him to
marry again, when I choked slightly. Before I could recover my breath,
my husband blurted out: ‘I may be stupid, I may be arrogant, but that is
not to say that I am wicked too! I made you blind with my own hands; if
I compound my error by deserting you and taking another wife, then I
vow, by my iṣṭa-devatā Krishna, to count it a sin as wicked as patricide or
the killing of Brahmins!’
I would not have let him make so terrible a vow – I would have
stopped him; but tears were swelling my breast, throttling my throat,
straining my eyes, preparing to stream down in torrents: I could not
restrain them enough to allow myself to speak. As I listened to what he
said, I buried my face in the pillow and wept tears of intense joy. I was
blind, but he would not leave me! He would clutch me to his heart as a
grieving man clings to his grief! I did not expect such blessings, but my
mind, in its selfishness, revelled in them.
When my first shower of tears was over, I drew his face close to my
breast and said, ‘Why did you make such a dreadful vow? I did not tell
you to marry again for your own happiness. It would be in my interest to
have a co-wife. I could hand over to her work for you that my blindness
makes impossible for me.’
‘Housework can be done by servants,’ said my husband. ‘How can I
marry a servant out of convenience and place her on the same seat as
you, who are a goddess to me?’ He lifted my face and placed a single,
pure kiss on my forehead; that kiss seemed to open a third eye on my
brow, to invest me with instant divinity. ‘Fine,’ I said to myself. ‘Now
that I am blind I cannot be a housewife any more in the outer, physical
world, but instead – rising above that world – I can be a goddess
working for my husband’s good! No more lies, no more deceptions – I’m
through with the meanness and deviousness that are the housewife’s lot.’
Yet for the whole of that day there was a conflict within me. I rejoiced
in the deep-seated knowledge that my husband’s awesome vow would
prevent him from marrying again. Nothing could dislodge that joy. But
the goddess I had found in myself that day said, ‘Perhaps a time will
come when remarriage will do your husband more good than adherence

to the vow.’ To which the woman in me answered, ‘That may be so, but
having made such a vow, no way can he marry again.’ The goddess then
said, ‘Maybe – but there’s no reason for you to be happy at that.’ To
which the woman answered, ‘I understand what you are saying, but he
did, after all, make the vow.’ And so forth. The debate went on and on.
The goddess then lapsed into silent disapproval, and my whole inner self
was engulfed by a terrifying darkness.
My conscience-stricken husband put a ban on all servants, and was
ready to run errands for me himself. At first I enjoyed my helpless
dependence on him in every trivial matter, because in this way I kept
him always near me. Because I couldn’t see him with my eyes, my desire
to keep him close grew overwhelming. That part of my pleasure in him
that had belonged to my eyes was now shared out between my other
senses – who fought to increase their share. Now, if ever my husband
worked away from the house for long, I would feel lost, bereft, with
nothing to hold on to. Previously when my husband went to college, if
he was late coming back, I would open the window a bit and watch the
road. I would let my eyes, as it were, bind to myself the world in which
he moved. Now my whole sightless body tried to reach out to him. My
main bridge between my world and his had collapsed. There was now an
impassable darkness between him and me: I could only sit helplessly and
anxiously, waiting for him to come from his shore to mine. Therefore,
whenever he had to leave me for even a moment, my whole blind body
longed to cling to him, desperately called out to him.
But such yearning and dependence is not healthy. A wife is burden
enough on her husband, without adding the great weight of blindness as
well. My all-consuming darkness was for me alone to bear. I fervently
promised I would not use my blindness to bind my husband to me.
Within a short time I had learnt to carry out my customary tasks
through sound and smell and touch. I even managed much of the
housework with greater skill than formerly. I came to think that vision
distracts as much as it helps us in our work. The eyes see far more than
is necessary to do a job well. And when the eyes act as watchmen, then
the ears become lazy; they hear much less than they should. Now, in the
absence of those vigilant eyes, my other senses did their duty calmly and
fully. I stopped allowing my husband to do my work, and restored to

myself all the work I had done for him before.
‘You’re depriving me of my chance to make amends,’ my husband
said.
‘I don’t know about your making amends,’ I said, ‘but why should I
add to my failings?’ Whatever he might say, it was a great relief to him
when I set him free. No man should have to make a lifelong vow of
servitude to a blind wife.
My husband qualified as a doctor and took me off to a country district.
To come to a village was like returning to my mother. I was eight years
old when I left my village and came to the city. In the next ten years, my
birthplace became as vague as a shadow in my mind. For as along as my
sight lasted, Calcutta crowded out my memories. When I lost my sight, I
realized that Calcutta had merely tricked my eyes; it could not fill my
heart. As soon as I lost my sight, the village of my childhood grew as
bright in my mind as a starry evening sky.
Towards the end of Agrahāyan we went to Hasimpur. It was a new
place for me – I did not know what it looked like; but it hugged me with
the scents and sensations of my childhood. The dawn breeze from the
newly ploughed, dew-soaked fields; the sweet pervasive scent of golden
fields of mustard and pigeon-pea; the songs of the cowherds; even the
clatter of bullock-cart wheels on broken roads; all thrilled me. The
buried memories of my early life seemed to come alive, to surround me
again with their inexpressible sounds and scents; my blind eyes were no
obstacle to them. I returned to my childhood: only my mother had not
been restored to me. I could see in my mind my Didimā letting her sparse
hair hang loose down her back in the sun, and laying out rows of baṛis in
the yard; but I no longer heard, in her sweet old quavering voice, the
lilting hymns of our village saint. The festival of the new rice-crop
boisterously rang through the moist winter air; but among the crowd
threshing the new paddy in the husking-shed, where were my village
playmates? In the evening I heard the lowing of the cattle from some
way off, and I remembered Mā with an evening lamp in her hand, on her
way to place it in the cowshed. The smell of damp fodder and burning
straw-smoke so entered my heart that I seemed to hear the cymbals and
bells from the Bidyalankars’ temple next to our village tank. It was as if

someone had sifted through all the things I had known in my first eight
years of life, and had wrapped me round with their quintessential
flavour.
I also recalled my childhood religious devotion – the way I picked
flowers at dawn to offer to Shiva. But alas, how Calcutta’s hustle and
bustle and chatter deform the mind! Religion loses its simplicity. A short
time after I became blind I remember a friend from my old village came
to me and said, ‘Aren’t you angry, Kumu? If I were in your shoes I
wouldn’t be able to stand the sight of your husband.’ I replied, ‘The sight
of him has been stopped, true, and I’m cross with my useless eyes for
that; but why should I blame my husband?’ Labanya was angry with him
for not having called a doctor in time, and was trying to make me angry
too. I explained to her that if we live in this world, our wisdom and
follies cause us – whether we like it or not – various kinds of pleasure
and pain; but if we keep a firm faith within, we can have peace even
amidst troubles – otherwise we spend our life in anger and rivalry and
conflict. Being blind was burden enough; so why should I increase the
burden by harbouring a grudge against my husband? Labanya was not
pleased to hear such old-fashioned notions from a girl like me, and she
went away, contemptuously shaking her head. But there can, I admit, be
poison in words: no words are wholly without effect. A few sparks from
her anger entered my mind; I stamped them out, but one or two burnmarks remained. This is why I say that there is too much talk, too much
chatter in Calcutta; one can so quickly become harsh and entrenched in
one’s thinking.
When I came to the village, the cool scent of śiuli-flowers picked as an
offering to Shiva revived my hopes and beliefs, made them bright and
fresh as they were in childhood. My heart and home were filled with the
Spirit of God. I bowed my head and said, ‘O Lord, it is good that my eyes
have gone, for you are mine.’
Alas, I was mistaken. To say of God ‘You are mine’ – even this is
vanity. ‘I am yours’ is all we have a right to say. And a day was soon to
come when God forced these words out of me: when nothing was left for
me, yet I had to struggle on; when I had no claim on anyone, only on
myself.

Life was happy for a while. My husband became quite a respected
doctor. His income became respectable too. But money is not a good
thing. It stunts the mind. When the mind is in control, it creates its own
pleasure; but when wealth takes up the pursuit of pleasure, there is
nothing for the mind to do. Where formerly the mind’s pleasure reigned,
possessions now stake their claim. Instead of happiness, we acquire
nothing but things.
I cannot pin-point a particular remark or event, but whether because a
blind person’s powers of perception are intensified, or for whatever other
reason, I was well able to see a change in my husband as his material
prosperity increased. The deep concern he had had, when young, for
justice and injustice, right and wrong, seemed to grow duller each day. I
remember how at one time he used to say, ‘I am not studying medicine
only to earn a living, but to bring as much benefit as possible to the
poor.’ On the subject of doctors who turned up at the doors of the dying
and would not even take a pulse without being paid in advance, he was
almost speechless with disgust. But I could see that was not so now. A
poor woman came and clung to his feet, begging him to save the life of
her only son, and he shook her off; in the end I persuaded him to treat
the boy, but his heart was not in it. I remember well my husband’s
attitude to corrupt earning in the days when we were short of money.
Now there was lots of money in the bank, yet a rich man’s secretary
came and had two days of secret discussions with my husband – I don’t
know what about; but when he came to me afterwards talking breezily
about other things, an uneasy feeling in my heart told me he was up to
no good.
Where was the husband I saw for the last time before I went blind? He
who had elevated me to a goddess by kissing me between my sightless
eyes, what had become of him? Those who suddenly fall prey to a raging
passion can pick themselves up again through another emotional
impulse; but those who, day by day, moment by moment, harden from
the marrow of their being, whose emotional capacities are throttled,
steadily, by outward success – for them I see no way out.
The visual gulf that had arisen between my husband and me was
nothing in itself; but I felt sick inside when I realized that where I was
now, he was not. I was blind – sitting in an inner region devoid of the

world’s light, with my youthful love still fresh, my devotion still intact,
my trust still unshaken: the dew of my gift of śephālī-flowers – arranged
with girlish care, offered to God at the start of my life – had still not
dried up; yet my husband had left my shaded, cool, eternally renewing
world, and was lost in the desert of money-making! All the things I
believed in, the faith I held to, all that I valued more than any worldly
treasure, were now scorned and dismissed by him from afar. At one time
there was no such rift; when we were young we had started along the
same road; but then (neither he nor I knew exactly when) our paths
divided, and now he was out of hearing when I called.
Sometimes I wondered if I made too much of things because I was
blind. With eyes, I could have seen the world as it is.
My husband himself one day told me no less. That morning an old
Muslim had come to ask him to treat his granddaughter for cholera. I
heard the man say, ‘I’m poor, sir, but Allah will bless you.’ My husband
said, ‘Whatever Allah will do is not enough; tell me first what you will
do for me.’ When I heard this I thought, ‘God has made me blind; why
not deaf too?’ The old man sighed, ‘O Allah!’ and took his leave. I at
once got my maid to bring him to the back door of the women’s
quarters, and said, ‘Bābā, here is some money to pay for your
granddaughter’s treatment. Fetch Dr Harish from the village – and pray
for my husband.’
All day I had no appetite. My husband woke up from his afternoon
nap and asked, ‘Why are you looking so glum?’ I was going to give my
usual answer – ‘It’s all right, there’s nothing wrong’ – but the time for
pretence had passed, and I said clearly, ‘I’ve been thinking of telling you
something for a long time, but I couldn’t think of how to say it. I don’t
know if I can explain to you what I am feeling, but I think you must
know in your heart that we who were one when we started our life
together have now become separate.’
My husband laughed and said, ‘Change is the way of the world.’
‘Money, beauty, youth may all be subject to change,’ I said, ‘but are
there no eternal values?’
He then said more seriously, ‘Think of women who have true cause for
complaint – with husbands who earn no money, or who do not love
them; you have plucked your misery out of the air!’ I realized then that

blindness had smeared my eyes with a salve that had set me apart from
this changeable world; I was not like other women; my husband would
never be able to understand me.
Meanwhile an aunt-in-law had come from her village to see how her
nephew was getting on. The first thing she said after we had taken the
dust of her feet was, ‘Well now, Baumā, you have unfortunately lost the
sight of your eyes. How is our Abinash supposed to run his household
with a blind wife? Let him marry again!’
If my husband had jokingly said ‘What a good idea, Pisimā – I put you
in charge of the match-making’, then I would have had nothing to worry
about. But he said with embarrassment, ‘Pisimā, I don’t know what you
are saying.’
‘What’s the matter?’ she replied. ‘I’m saying nothing wrong. Well now,
what do you say, Baumā?’
I smiled and said, ‘You’re not asking the right person for advice. If you
want to pick someone’s pocket, you don’t seek their prior agreement!’
‘Yes, you’re right there,’ said my aunt-in-law. ‘I suggest we confer
privately, Abinash. Agreed? And I say to you, Baumā, the more wives her
husband takes, the prouder a Kulin girl should be of him. Our Abinash
could marry instead of carrying on as a doctor, and he wouldn’t have to
worry about earning. When sick people fall into a doctor’s hands they
die, and once they’re dead they don’t pay him fees any more; but Kulin’s
wives are fated not to die, and the longer they live the more the husband
profits.’
Two days later my husband asked his aunt, in my presence, ‘Pisimā,
can you find me a woman of good family who could help my wife like a
relative? She can’t see, and if a companion was with her all the time I’d
be much less anxious.’ When I was newly blind such a suggestion would
have made more sense, but now I couldn’t think of any household task
that was awkward because of my blindness. Nevertheless, I made no
objection and kept silent.
‘That would be no problem,’ said my aunt-in-law. ‘My brother-in-law
has a daughter, as good as she is beautiful. She’s grown up, just waiting
for a suitable groom; if she could get a Kulin like you she could be

married at once.’
My husband said with alarm, ‘Who’s talking about marriage?’
To which my aunt-in-law said, ‘How can a girl of good family come
and live in your house without being married to you?’ That was true,
certainly, and my husband could not think of anything to counter it.
I stood alone, shut in the endless darkness of my blindness, crying out
to God to save my husband.
A few days later, as I came out from my morning pūjā, my aunt-in-law
said, ‘Baumā, the niece of mine I mentioned, Hemangini, has come today
from her village. Himu, this is your Didi, pay your respects to her.’
At that moment my husband appeared and, as if surprised at seeing an
unknown woman in the room, started to leave again.
My aunt-in-law said, ‘Where are you going, Abinash?’
‘Who is she?’ he asked.
‘She is my brother-in-law’s daughter – Hemangini,’ she replied. My
husband then proceeded to show unwarranted curiosity about when she
had come, who had brought her, what her background was, and so forth.
I thought to myself, ‘I understand everything that’s happening, so why
this pretence on top of everything else? Secrecy, covering up, lies! If you
have to do wrong to satisfy your lust, then do so – but why degrade
yourself further because of me? Why tell lies to deceive me?’
I took Hemangini’s hand and led her into my bedroom. I stroked her
face and body, and could tell that her face was beautiful, and her age
was not less than fourteen or fifteen. The girl broke out in delicious
laughter.
‘What are you doing?’ she said. ‘Are you trying to exorcize me or
something?’ At her simple, frank laughter, a dark cloud within me
seemed to lift at once.
I put my right arm round her shoulders and said, ‘I’m having a look at
you, bhāi.’ I then stroked her soft face again.
‘Having a look at me?’ She laughed again, and said, ‘Do you have to
feel me to see how big I am, like brinjal or beans in your garden?’
I then realized that Hemangini didn’t know that I was blind. ‘I’m
blind, you know, sister,’ I said. She was taken aback at this, and became

more serious. I could well imagine how intently she was studying my
face and my sightless eyes with her own curious, youthful, wide-open
eyes.
Then she said, ‘So this is why you invited Auntie here?’
‘No, I didn’t invite her,’ I said. ‘She kindly invited herself.’
‘Kindly?’ said the girl, with another laugh. ‘Her kindness will keep her
here a long time then. But why did my father send me here?’
Pisimā entered the room at that moment. She’d been having a long
talk with my husband. As soon as she came in, Hemangini said, ‘Auntie,
when are we going home, tell me?’
‘Well I never,’ said my aunt-in-law. ‘No sooner is she here than she
wants to go. I’ve never known such a restless girl.’
‘Auntie,’ said Hemangini, ‘I can see that you are in no hurry to leave.
You’re a relative here – you can stay as long as you like. But I’d like to
go – that’s what I’m telling you.’
She then took my arm and said, ‘What do you think, bhāi? You’re not
really relatives of mine.’ I embraced her instead of replying. I could see
that however domineering Pisimā might be, she was no match for this
girl. She betrayed no outward annoyance – indeed she tried to show
affection; but Hemangini brushed her aside. Laughing the whole matter
off as a spoilt girl’s joke, she started to leave – but then had further
thoughts and turned back, saying to Hemangini, ‘Himu, come along, it’s
time for your bath.’ Hemangini came up to me and said, ‘Let’s both of us
go to the ghāṭ – what do you say, bhāi?’ My aunt-in-law forbore to stop
us, despite her reluctance to let us go; she knew that if it came to a
tussle with Hemangini the girl would win – and besides, a quarrel
wouldn’t look good in front of me.
As we made our way to the ghāṭ behind the house, Hemangini asked,
‘Why haven’t you got any children?’
I smiled and said, ‘How should I know why not? God hasn’t given me
any.’
‘I dare say you had some kind of sin in you,’ said Hemangini.
‘That too is only known to God,’ I replied.
The girl said conclusively, ‘Look at Auntie, though. She has such
crookedness in her, no children can possibly form in her womb.’

I had no understanding myself of the mysteries of sin and virtue,
suffering and happiness, punishment and reward – so I couldn’t explain
them to the girl. All I could do was sigh and inwardly say to God, ‘You
know!’
Hemangini hugged me and said, laughing, ‘Oh dear, even my words
made you sigh! Usually no one listens to what I say!’
I noticed that my husband was beginning to neglect his medical
practice. If a call came from a long way off he did not go; if he went on a
call near by he would deal with it as quickly as possible. Formerly he
would stay in his surgery during gaps in his work, only coming home for
his midday meal and siesta. Now my aunt-in-law summoned him at all
hours, and he himself came to see her quite unnecessarily. When I heard
her calling out, ‘Himu, bring my pān-box, will you?’ I knew that my
husband was in his aunt’s room. For the first two or three days,
Hemangini fetched pān-box, oil-bowl, vermilion-pot or whatever else she
was asked for. But after that she refused to budge, and sent the maid
with the requested article. If my aunt-in-law called, ‘Hemangini, Himu,
Himi’, the girl would embrace me with a kind of intense pity: dread and
sorrow came over her. She would now never mention my husband in my
presence, even by mistake.
Meanwhile my elder brother came to see me. I knew how observant
he was. It would have been practically impossible to hide from him what
was afoot. My brother was a harsh judge of people. He never forgave the
slightest wrong-doing. My greatest fear was that he would see my
husband as a criminal. I tried to cover things up with a smokescreen of
excessive cheerfulness: by talking and fussing to an extreme degree, by
putting on an elaborate show. But this was so unnatural to me, it
increased the danger of detection. My brother, however, did not stay
very long: my husband’s uneasiness took the form of blatant rudeness
towards him – so he left. Before he went, he placed his hand – trembling
with pure love – on my head for a long time: I could feel the passionate
blessing his touch conveyed; his tears fell on my own tear-soaked cheeks.
That Caitra evening, I remember, market-goers were making their way
home. A storm was approaching, bringing rain from a long way off; one
could sense it in the dampness of the wind and the smell of wet earth.
People were anxiously calling for their friends in the dark fields. I never

sat with a lamp alight in the dark blindness of my bedroom, in case my
clothes caught fire by brushing against it, or some other accident
happened. I was sitting on the floor in my lonely dark room, clasping my
hands and crying out to the God of my blind world. I was saying: ‘Lord,
when I do not feel your mercy, when I do not understand your wishes,
what can I do but cling with all my might to the rudder of my helplessly
broken heart? Blood pours from my heart, but how can I control the
tempest? What further trials must I suffer, weak as I am?’ Tears streamed
down as I prayed – I buried my face in the bed and sobbed. I’d spent the
whole day doing housework. Hemangini had followed me like a shadow:
I’d had no chance to release the grief welling up inside me. That evening
at last the tears came out; and it was then that I noticed the bed stirring
a little, the swishing sound of someone moving about, and a moment
later Hemangini had come and thrown her arms round my neck and was
silently wiping my eyes with the end of her sari. She must have entered
the bedroom earlier in the evening, but when, and with what intention, I
could not tell. She did not ask a single question, and I also said nothing.
She slowly passed her cool hand across my brow. I have no idea when
the thunder and torrential rain of the storm passed; but at length a
quietness came and soothed my fevered heart.
The next day Hemangini said, ‘Auntie, you may not want to go home,
but there’s a servant who can take me back – so there!’
‘There’s no need for that,’ said my aunt-in-law. ‘I’m also going
tomorrow; we can go together. Look at this, Himu, our dear Abinash has
brought a pearl ring for you.’ She then proudly put the ring on to
Hemangini’s finger.
‘Now you watch, Auntie,’ said Hemangini, ‘what a good aim I have.’
She threw the ring through the window, right into the middle of the tank
behind the house.
My aunt-in-law bristled with anger and surprise and dismay. She
clutched my hands and said again and again, ‘Baumā, be sure you don’t
tell Abinash about this childish behaviour; the poor boy will be very hurt
if you do. Promise me, Baumā.’
‘You needn’t say any more, Pisimā,’ I said. ‘I shan’t tell him a thing.’
The next day before they left Hemangini embraced me and said, ‘Didi,
don’t forget me.’ I stroked her face with both hands and said, ‘The blind

never forget, sister. I have no world; I live only in my mind.’ I then took
her head and sniffed her hair and kissed her. My tears mingled with her
hair.
When Hemangini left, my world dried up. She had brought perfume
and beauty and music into my life, bright light and the softness of youth:
now that she was gone, what was there for me when I stretched out my
arms? My husband came and said with exaggerated gusto, ‘They’ve
gone! Now we can breathe again – now I can do some work.’ How
wretched I was! Why did he put on such an act? Did he think I was
afraid of the truth? Had I ever flinched at a blow? Didn’t my husband
know this? When I gave up my eyes, did I not accept eternal darkness
calmly?
For a long time blindness had been the only gulf between me and my
husband, but now there was a further division. My husband never
mentioned Hemangini’s name to me, even in error; as if she had been
totally removed from his world, as if she had never at any time made
any mark on it. Yet I could easily tell he was, frequently, inquiring after
her by letter. Just as when a pond fills up with flood-water so that lotusflowers tug at their stalks, whenever he was affected by even the
slightest elation I could feel a tugging at my heart. I was perfectly aware
of when he got news of her and when he did not. But I couldn’t ask him
about her. My soul longed to hear about the bright and beautiful star
who had briefly shone so vividly in the darkness of my heart, but I had
no right to speak of her to my husband even for a moment. On this,
there was a total silence between us, full of suppressed words and
feelings.
About the middle of Baisākh, the maid came to me and asked,
‘Māṭhākrun, they’re loading up a boat at the ghāṭ – where is the master
going?’ I knew that preparations were afoot. In the sky of my fate there
had been, for some days, a lull before the storm. Tattered clouds of
doom were gathering now: Shiva was silently pointing his finger,
amassing all his destructive power above my head – I knew that well.
But I said to my maid, ‘I’ve no idea. I haven’t heard anything.’ The maid
didn’t dare to ask any more questions, and left, sighing heavily.
Very late at night my husband came and said, ‘I’ve been called to a
place a long way off – I must leave at dawn tomorrow. I probably shan’t

be back for two or three days.’
I rose from my bed and said, ‘Why are you lying?’ He answered in a
weak trembling voice, ‘What lies have I told you?’
‘You are going to get married,’ I said.
He was silent. I also stood stock-still. For a long time no sound was
heard in the room. In the end I said, ‘Give me an answer. Say, “Yes, I’m
going to get married.” ’
He replied like an echo, ‘Yes, I’m going to get married.’
‘No,’ I said, ‘you will not be able to go. I shall save you from this
dreadful danger, this terrible sin. If I cannot do that, what kind of wife
am I? For what have I offered so many pūjās to Shiva?’
Once again the room fell silent for a long time. I slumped to the floor,
clung to my husband’s feet and said, ‘What wrong have I done you?
Where have I fallen short? What need have you for another wife? I beg
you, speak the truth.’
My husband then said slowly, ‘This is the truth: I am frightened of
you. Your blindness has covered you with a perpetual shroud, which I
have no means of piercing. You are like a goddess, terrifying as a
goddess – I cannot go on living with you for ever. I want an ordinary
woman whom I can scold, whom I can be angry with, whom I can
fondle, whom I can deck with ornaments.’
‘Cut open my breast and see!’ I said. ‘I am an ordinary woman – in my
heart I am nothing but that young bride you married. I want to believe, I
want to trust, I want to worship: do not demean yourself and bring
misery to me by raising me above you! Please, keep me in all respects
beneath you!’
I cannot remember all that I said. Does a turbulent sea hear its own
roaring? All I recall is that I said, ‘If I have been true to you, then God
will never allow you to break your righteous vows. Either I’ll be
widowed or Hemangini will die before you commit such a sin!’ With that
I fainted.
When I regained consciousness, the dawn chorus had not quite begun,
and my husband had gone. I shut myself into the prayer-room to
perform a pūjā. I stayed in the room for the whole day long. In the
evening we were shaken by a Kāl-baiśākhī storm. I did not say, ‘O God,

my husband is on the river now, look after him.’ I said, passionately,
‘God, let whatever is my fate happen, but save my husband from his
terrible sin.’ The whole night passed like this. I continued my pūjā
through the next day too. Who gave me strength to last for so long
without sleep and food I cannot say; but I stayed sitting like stone before
the stone image of the deity.
In the evening, someone started to push at the door from the outside.
When the door burst open, I passed out again. When I came round I
heard, ‘Didi!’ – and I found I was lying in Hemangini’s lap. When I
moved my head, her new wedding-sari rustled. O God, you did not heed
my prayer! My husband had fallen!
Hemangini lowered her head and said slowly, ‘I have come for your
blessing, Didi.’
For the first minute I froze; then I sat up and said, ‘Why should I not
bless you, sister? What wrong have you done?’
Hemangini laughed her sweet high laugh and said, ‘Wrong? Did you
do wrong when you married? What wrong is there in my marrying?’
I hugged her and laughed too. I said to myself, ‘Do my prayers have
the last word? Is God’s will not supreme? Let blows fall on my head if
they must, but I shall not let them fall on the place in my heart where I
keep my faith and religion. I shall stay as I was.’ Hemangini bent down
and took the dust of my feet. ‘May you be eternally blessed, eternally
happy,’ I said.
‘I want more than your blessing,’ she said, ‘I want you to welcome me
and my husband together into your chaste arms. You must not feel shy
about him. If you give me permission, I shall bring him here.’
‘Bring him,’ I said.
A little later I heard a new footfall in the room, and the affectionate
question, ‘Are you well, Kumu?’
I hurriedly stumbled from the bed and did obeisance to him, crying,
‘Dādā!’
‘What do you mean “Dādā”?” said Hemangini. ‘Don’t be silly! He is
your new bhagnīpati!’1
I understood all. I knew that my elder brother had vowed not to get
married: our mother was no more, he had no one to push him into

marriage. He had married now because of me. Tears rolled down my
cheeks; I couldn’t stop them. My elder brother gently ran his hands
through my hair; Hemangini hugged me and went on laughing.
I couldn’t sleep that night. I waited with beating heart for my husband
to return. How would he contain his shame and bitterness?
Very late at night, the door opened slowly. I sat up with a start. It was
my husband’s step. My heart pounded. He came on to the bed and took
my hand and said, ‘Your brother saved me. I was in a state of madness
for a while and was about to destroy myself. When I got into the boat
God alone knew the weight that was pressing on my breast; when we ran
into a storm on the river and I feared for my very life, I thought, “If I
drown, I shall have been saved.” When I arrived at Mathurganj I was
told of the marriage, the previous day, of your brother and Hemangini. I
cannot describe the shame but also the joy with which I returned to the
boat. In these past few days I have learnt for sure that I would find no
happiness in deserting you. You are my goddess.’
I smiled and said, ‘No, I don’t want to be a goddess. I am the keeper of
your house – an ordinary woman.’
‘I also have a request,’ said my husband. ‘Never embarrass me again
by calling me a god.’
The next day the neighbourhood resounded with ululations and the
sound of conches.1 Hemangini began to tease my husband mercilessly,
from morning to night, at meals and at rest, giving him no relief; but no
one alluded to what had happened, or where he had gone.

Appendix A: ‘Passing Time in the Rain’
This famous poem – barṣā-yāpan from sonār tarī (‘The Golden Boat’,
1894) – is rightly felt by many Bengali readers to reach right to the core
of Tagore’s short stories. It was completed in June 1892, but was begun
‘much earlier’; and in its picture of the solitary young Tagore whiling
away the hours at Jorasanko, as well as in its tripping medieval metre, it
has a charmingly youthful quality. But it is not quite as light and
improvisatory as it first seems. There is strong cumulative energy in its
evocation of the rain, the Meghadūta, and Vaishnava songs about Radha
pining for Krishna, intermixed with the poet’s own passionate
aspirations. The section containing the lines that I have italicized was
used by Pramathanath Bisi as an epigraph for his book on Tagore’s short
stories. choṭo prāṇ, choṭo byathā, choṭo choṭo duḥkha-kathā (‘small lives,
small pains, small stories of unhappiness’) is what everyone quotes; but
the lines about plain narrative and ‘incompleteness’ are just as germane,
and the correlation between monsoon rain and human tears is
sonorously explicit. The poem shows how deliberate the short stories
were: Tagore knew exactly what he was doing in them.
A third-floor roof in Calcutta, A wooden hut at one end;
Dawn’s first eastern glimmer, South door open to the wind.
My bedding spread on the floor, My head close to the door,
I cast my roving eye
At hundreds of roofs stretching, Such mysteries concealing –
Frowning at the sky.
In a corner of the wall,
Pressing the window-sill,
A trembling splash of green – A tiny peepul-seedling,
Watching its shadow dancing, All day long alone.
Filling the sky all round
Āṣāṛh clouds descend,
Rain approaches darkly:
Yoking the heavens together, Indra’s horses thunder,
Lightning flickers sharply.
As streaming torrents pour, I feel I am banished far,

Beyond the universe:
Perched in my hut in the rain, I leave time and space.
How happy such days have been As I sit here on my own,
Reading the Meghadūta!
Outside the wind blows wildly In constant fruitless frenzy – I lose
myself in scenes
Of mountains, rivers and towns In ancient monsoon India:
Each cloud-covered village and land So mellifluously named – While
the lovers I long have known Yearn and grieve and pine,
Each imagining each,
Hearts tugging them close
While a great dividing space Keeps them out of reach.
The Yaksa bride paces,
Turns and listens and watches, Counting the days with flowers.
Or else I embrace attentively Govinda Das’s padābalī
As the rain noisily pours.
I sing out again and again
That trysting-song of monsoon Beside the dark Yamuna:
Young, passionate Radha,
Seeking her lover’s arbour, Nothing in the world can stop her, And
the forest gets more lonely As the rain falls more strongly, Patters
and pounds and pours – Only young Madan beside her, No other
friend to shield her, No houses with open doors.
As Āṣāṛh reaches its height, I mix two rāgas to write1
A song of the monsoon floods.
Or scanning the first stanza Of Jayadev’s Gītāgovinda
I sing of sleek rain-clouds.
Or at night when the air is still And buckets of rain fall,
I lie deliciously sleepy
And a song about nights in Śrābaṇ, The roar of incessant storm, Rolls
around in my memory.
Or – ‘Lying on a bed in bliss, Melting in amorousness,
Sunk in dreamy longing’ –
I imagine that vivid scene
In ancient Vrindavan,
Radha’s lonely dreaming,
Her gently panting breath,
Her smile on her dreamy mouth – Her closed eyes aquiver,
Her head slumped on her arm, Lying all on her own,
A dim lamp in the corner.
In the mountains thunder rumbles, Rain in the trees rattles,
Frogs burble all night –

How joyously she dreams
Of lying in her lover’s arms!
Alas, alas when she wakes
And her frenzied rapture breaks In mournful solitude,
She sees the lamp nearly out, Hears the watchman’s hourly shout –
And the force of the rain is renewed, With thunder’s booming sound
And crickets buzzing all round, Filling the whole world.
When she wakes during such a pounding, Caught between waking
and dreaming, Think how her heart is swirled!
One book after another,
Dipping in out of order,
Thus I pass the night.

I flick through some English1 verses But find in none of them traces
Of the shade of this monsoon rain – No sound of this dark pattering,
No deep, indolent yearning, No self-immersing pain!
The rain’s relentless note, The music, inside me and out, Of torrents
beating the ground, Carrying me wide and far,
Roving from shore to shore, Where in such poems is it found?
I throw the book on the floor, I sit close to the door,
Bury myself in thinking.
Nothing to do, now,
I gaze and wonder how
I shall pass the time till evening.
But then I buckle down,
Write to a new plan,
All day carefully –
Why should I not, if I want, Following my own bent,
Write story after story –
Small lives, humble distress,
Tales of humdrum grief and pain,
Simple, clear straightforwardness;
Of the thousands of tears streaming daily
A few saved from oblivion;
No elaborate description,
Plain steady narration,
No theory or philosophy,
No story quite resolved,
Not ending at the end,
But leaving the heart uneasy.
All the world’s unnumbered
Stories never completed:
Buds unripely torn –

Dust of fame unsung,
The love, the terror, the wrong
Of thousands of lives unknown.
From all the world around me They seem to fall unceasingly Like
floods of monsoon rain: Momentary smiles and tears
Pouring through the years,
The sound goes on and on.
Each lost and forgotten moment Whirls in a dancing torrent: Oh may
I from it gather
The clouds of life’s monsoon, And make them rain down
What else would be gone for ever!

Appendix B: Letters
1. chinnapatrābalī, Letter No. 3, Shelidah, 28–30 November 1889, to
Indira Devi1
Our boat has been moored by a sandbank opposite Shelidah. It’s a huge,
desolate sandbank, stretching out of sight: with slivers of river-water
here and there, or expanses of wet sand that look like water. No village,
no people, no trees, no grass – but monotony is broken by patches of
cracked, wet black earth, alternating with dry white sand. If you turn
and look to the east, an endless blueness meets an endless pale
yellowness. The sky is empty and the earth too is empty: dry, harsh,
barren emptiness below; ample, airy emptiness above. I have never seen
such desolation. If you look round to the west again, you see a small
kink in the river where the stream scarcely flows, a high bank, and
beyond that huts and trees, wonderfully dreamlike in the evening
sunlight. It’s as though on one side you have Creation and the other
Destruction. I say ‘evening sunlight’, because we go out for a walk in the
evening and I have a mental picture of the scene as it is then. If you stay
in Calcutta you forget how extraordinarily beautiful the world really is.
It’s only when you are here, and can see the sun setting behind the
peaceful riverside trees, and thousands of stars appearing above the
unending, pale, lonely, silent sandbank, that you realize how amazing
these daily events are. The sun seems to open a huge book each
morning, and by the evening a huge page has been turned in the sky
above: what extraordinary things are written on it! And this narrow river
and vast sandbank, and the picture-like bank opposite with its plain
fields beyond, are a vast, silent, secluded school being taught from the
book. Enough! All this would sound like ‘poetry’2 in the city, but here it
doesn’t seem so far-fetched.
In the evening one of the servants takes the children off over the
sandbank in one direction and Balu, the two ladies and I also go off in
separate directions.1 Meanwhile the sun goes down completely, the last

gleam of light fades from the sky, and everything is obliterated – until
the faint shadow of one’s body to one side shows that a slender crescent
moon is weakly shining. The ample expanses of sand in the pale
moonlight become even more confusing: what is sand, what is water,
what is sky, becomes a matter of guesswork; so everything seems like a
kind of unreal fantasy-world. Yesterday, after wandering there for a long
time, I returned to the boat and found that apart from the children no
one else had got back. I sat down in an armchair, and began to read an
extremely obscure book called Animal Magnetism in the equally obscure
light of an oil-lamp; but still no one returned. I put the book face down
on the bed and went out on deck: nothing could be seen in the blackness
all around. Everything was dim and deserted. I shouted out ‘Balu’ loudly:
my voice rang out in all directions, but no one answered. Then my chest
tightened, suddenly folded up like an umbrella. Gofur went out
searching with a lamp, and Prasanna, and the crew of the boat: I sent
them all off in different directions. I was shouting ‘Balu, Balu’, Prasanna
was shouting ‘Choṭo Mā’, and the boatmen’s shouts of ‘Babu, Babu’
mingled with the rest. Together our voices made a bleak kind of music in
the desert, in the silent night. No one answered us. Gofur once or twice
cried from a long way off, ‘I’ve seen them’ – but then a moment later
corrected himself with ‘No, no’. Imagine the state I was in: picture the
silent darkness, the faint moonlight, the still and deserted empty
sandbank, Gofur’s lantern moving around in the distance, and every now
and then from one direction or another anxious calls and their
melancholy echoes, with sometimes a burst of excited hope and the next
moment despairing disappointment. An appalling dread took hold of my
mind. Sometimes I thought they must have fallen into quicksand;
sometimes I imagined that Balu had fainted or something; or else I had
fantasies of various kinds of ferocious wild beasts. I recalled that ‘those
who do not look after themselves often unwittingly cause danger to
others’.1 I turned bitterly against any notion of freedom for women! But
a little later there were shouts that they were over on the other side of a
channel – they had crossed by using bits of sand as steppingstones, and
now could not get back. A boat was dispatched, and they were rescued –
with Balu saying, ‘I’m never going to go out with you again.’ They were
all ashamed, exhausted and upset, so I refrained from giving them a
proper talking-to. The next morning, however, I couldn’t bring myself to

be angry, and what had actually been a serious alarm evaporated in
laughter, as if it had all been a joke. Ah well, at least in describing it to
you three days later I’ve got it off my chest.
Oh dear! Maulabi-saheb2 is here salaaming before me with a crowd of
tenants. I want to say:
Down with tenants! Down with the jamidāri!

If only they could all get lost with Maulabi!3

2. ciṭhipatra, Vol. I, Letter No. 5, Kaligram, December 1890, to Mrinalini
Devi
Bhāi Choṭobau,

I arrived at Kaligram today. It took three days to get
here. I had to pass through lots of different places. First a big river; then
a small river, with trees on both sides, beautiful to look at; then the river
gradually became narrower, very like a canal, with high banks on either
side, very closed in. Then to a place where the current was extremely
swift: twenty or twenty-five people were needed to pull our boat
through. There is a huge marsh which they call the ‘Moving Marsh’.
Water pours out of it into the river. With a great deal of pushing and
pulling, we managed with considerable difficulty to get the boat into the
marsh. Water stretched drearily all around, with clumps of grass or scrub
on patches of land here and there: like a field flooded after heavy rain.
Sometimes the boat got stuck on the bits of land, and it would take an
hour or an hour-and-a-half of pushing and shoving to get her afloat
again. The mosquitoes were terrible. To be honest, I didn’t like this
marsh at all. After that we sailed along small streams, or through more
marshes. At last we arrived. I don’t relish the prospect of a similar
journey to Birahimpur. The river here has no current at all: with its
patches of floating moss, and clumps of jungly vegetation, it smells like a
stagnant village pond, and at night the mosquitoes are quite something.
If it becomes unbearable, I shall flee back to Calcutta.
When I got Bela’s sweet letter I wanted to come straight back home. Is
she missing me a lot? She’s so little, I don’t know what to do for her. Tell
her there’ll be lots of kisses and jam for her when I come. Last night I

dreamt of Khokā:1 I was dancing him on my knee, and he was finding it
great fun. Has he started to talk yet? I think that Bela was already
talking a lot at his age. Is it cold with you? I’ve been shivering with cold
here – except that last night when we found a firm mooring for the boat
and I drew all the curtains, I woke up feeling too hot! And on top of
that, at one or two in the morning, right next to us, a crowd of people
started singing, ‘Why do you sleep so much, my love? Wake up, wake
up!’ If ‘my love’ lived near by perhaps she would have given them a
beating. The boatman shut them up, but that line ‘Wake up, wake up,
my love!’ kept on going round and round in my head: it made me feel
quite ill. I slept only at the end of the night, after I had drawn back the
curtains and opened the window. So today I’ve been feeling sleepy all
the time. How is your brother getting on in Calcutta? Have you made
any arrangements for his studies? How many months’ allowance has he
already been given? I hope to come back in about a fortnight – but I
can’t say exactly when.
3. chinnapatrābalī, Letter No. 13, Kaligram, January 1891, to Indira Devi
This great world of Nature lying silently in front of me – how I love her!
I want to reach out with my arms and embrace her: her trees and rivers
and fields, her sounds and quietness, her dawns and dusks. I feel that we
receive the world’s gifts as from a kind of heaven. I don’t know what else
this heaven could give, but I cannot imagine it has given more of itself
than in the people here – so gentle, weak, touchingly timorous and
childlike. This world of Nature, our own Mother Earth, comes to us
bringing, like riches in her lap, all the feelings of the humble, mortal
hearts that are found here – in her golden fields, by her nurturing rivers,
in dwellings filled with happy and sad tenderness. So useless are we, that
we cannot protect these people, we cannot save them; various unseen
powerful forces work to tear them from her breast; but Earth does all she
can for them. I love this Earth so much. There is a great, outstretching
grief in her face, as if she is thinking, ‘I am the daughter of a god, but I
do not have the power of a god. I love but I cannot save; I begin but I
cannot complete; I give birth but I cannot ward off the clutches of
death.’ This makes me turn away from heaven and look at my Mother

Earth in her humble home with even more love. She is so helpless, so
powerless, so incomplete, so stirred all the time by thousands of anxious
fears.
4. chinnapatrābalī, Letter No. 16, Sajadpur, February 1891, to Indira Devi
I see all sorts of rural sights, which I greatly enjoy watching. Just
opposite my window on the bank of a canal, a group of gypsies have set
up camp, stretching cloth and matting over split bamboo-poles to make
tents – small awnings, I should say, too low to stand up in. They do all
their domestic tasks out in the open; only at night do they sometimes
pack themselves into the tents to sleep. Gypsies are like this. They have
no proper home anywhere, they don’t pay rent to any landlord: they
wander around from place to place with a herd of pigs, a few dogs and a
bunch of children. The police keep a suspicious eye on them. I often
stand by my window and watch them going about their work. They are
quite handsome – Hindusthani in looks. Dark-complexioned, certainly,
but graceful, strong and shapely in physique. The women are attractive:
tall and slender and lean, rather like English girls in the frankness and
freedom with which they move – that is to say they are very confident,
with an easy, swift, springiness in their gait. Yes, they are just like darkskinned English girls. A man will put a pan on to cook, and then sit
splitting bamboo to make wickerwork baskets or trays; his wife will sit
with a small mirror in her lap and carefully wash her face with a wet rag
two or three times, pat and pull at her sari to get it nicely arranged,
squat down near to her man, and get on with some kind of task. They
are real children of the soil, truly close to Nature – they are born and die
wherever they find themselves, they wander around from place to place.
I’m very curious to know exactly how they live and think and feel. They
are out in the open all the time, in the freedom of land and air; it’s an
unconventional existence, yet they have their work and affections and
children and domestic routines. I have never seen any of them idle; they
are always busy with one kind of work or another. If a woman comes to
the end of her work, she immediately goes and sits behind another
woman, unties her hair and begins carefully to pick it over for lice – and
maybe she gossips about whatever is going on in that small three-tent

encampment: I cannot precisely tell from a distance, but it looks to me
to be so. This morning this peaceful gypsy encampment was severely
disrupted. It was about half past eight or nine – they had brought out the
rugs and tattered quilts they sleep on at night to spread them out in the
sun on top of the awnings. The pigs and piglets had all settled down in a
hole, nestling up to one another so that they looked like a huge ball of
mud: after the cold of the night they were obviously finding the morning
sunshine very warm and comfortable. Suddenly two of the dogs came
and jumped on their necks, yapping and yelping and waking them up.
Squealing with annoyance they ran off in search of some breakfast.
The other day I was writing my diary,1 now and then looking dreamily
out at the road, when there was a sudden uproar. I went over to the
window and saw a crowd of people round the gypsy encampment:
amongst them there was a prosperous-looking type brandishing a lāṭhi
and abusing them luridly. The gypsy-leader was standing and trying in a
very meek and frightened way to explain himself. I realized he was
suspected of something, so the police constable had come to make a fuss.
His wife was sitting and calmly peeling bamboo-canes, as if she was
sitting alone and there was nothing untoward going on. But suddenly she
stood up, went up fearlessly to the constable, waved her arms and began
to berate him at the top of her voice. At once the constable’s confidence
diminished by about 75 per cent: he tried feebly to say something, but
she didn’t give him a chance. He had to beat a retreat in a manner very
different from that in which he had come. From a distance he shouted, ‘I
warn you, you’d better clear off from here.’ I assumed that my gypsy
neighbours would have to roll up their mats and stakes and shift from
here with their children and pigs. But there is no sign of that; they are
still here, serenely peeling bamboo, cooking and serving food, and
picking head-lice.
I see many things through my open window. I’m intrigued by them
all, but some of them are especially haunting. I can’t bear to watch
people loading up bullocks with impossible burdens and then stabbing at
them with sticks to make them move. This morning I saw a woman
taking her naked, skinny little boy to the canal-water to give him a
wash. It’s terribly cold today; when she stood the child in the water and
poured it over him, he wept and wailed piteously – and he had a

dreadful hacking cough. His mother then gave him such a heavy slap on
the cheek that I could hear it clearly inside my room. The boy bent over
with his hands on his knees and shuddered with sobs – his cough was
choking his weeping. The woman then dragged the soaked, naked,
shivering child back home. This incident struck me as devilishly cruel.
The boy was so small – my own son’s age. A scene like this strikes a
heavy blow at one’s ideal of man – it really makes one’s faith stumble.
Little children are so helpless – if they are treated unjustly their innocent
distress and wails simply annoy their cruel tormentors even more. They
don’t know how to defend themselves. The woman had come well
wrapped up against the cold, and the boy didn’t have a stitch on – and
he had a cough, and he had such a beating from her!
5. ciṭhipatra, Vol. V, Letter No. 12, Shelidah, 19 December 1892, to
Pramatha Chaudhuri1
Bhāi Pramatha,

I got your letter yesterday, but because I was busy with a
poem I wasn’t able to reply immediately. I find it very difficult to write
good letters to order. Writing articles is easy – the pen can range
unhindered over a whole subject. But in letters everything has to be
expressed in hints and gestures and delicate touches of feeling – it’s
almost like writing poetry. But where is there the time to write letters
like that? At one time I found letter-writing a joy, and maybe I was able
to give joy by writing them; but the kind of adolescent indolence that is
required is no more. Now everything has to be dashed off quickly. Yet so
many ideas crowd my mind. Sometimes my mind feels carefree and light
and fluttery, and then letters float up like coloured soap-bubbles. But
when I spend all day in heavy, arduous, worldly work, then my fingers
get so blunted that I can’t toss off fine artistic work easily – it takes me a
long time to do it. Poem-writing has been my addiction all my life:
sometimes when the craving for it comes over me, then if I am not able
to write my whole mind becomes unbalanced and life becomes
unbearable; but I can’t get the necessary time! I keep thinking I can
polish off all my tasks quickly and then sit down and concentrate on my
poetry in serene seclusion; but every day and every month new tasks

present themselves. There’s no one who can give me any help: so I just
have to grit my teeth and do it all – and it’s work that has to be done
thoughtfully and slowly and patiently. Yet it’s not real work: all the
things that I really want to do are having to be pushed aside and
postponed to some unspecified future date. There are also many duties
I’m neglecting, and complaints from my family to put up with, and every
day a sense of frustration and dissatisfaction with myself. But there’s a
kind of moral idealism in me that makes me patiently bear all the duties
that pile themselves on to my shoulders. Whatever duties my
circumstances dictate have to be borne and carried out. So every month I
bow my head and write things for sādhanā, and every day I attend
dutifully to all the petty responsibilities of a zamindar. Do you imagine I
get any pleasure from this? Today even the letters I write are a kind of
duty. I feel harassed a lot of the time, but I think that on the whole this
is the best way of life for me. Flying about on a winged horse called
Imagination is not very healthy exercise for a mind like mine!
6. chinnapatrābalī, Letter No. 98, Shelidah, 16 May 1893, to Indira Devi
At half past six yesterday afternoon, fresh and clean after a bath, I
walked for an hour or so on the sandbank by the river; then I rowed out
on the river in our new dinghy; then spread out my bedding in it and lay
silently in the evening darkness in the cool breeze of evening. Sh——1sat
near by and chatted on about various things. The sky above my eyes was
absolutely studded with stars. Almost every day I wonder: shall I ever be
born again under this starry sky? Shall I ever, in this beautiful corner of
Bengal, be able to spread out my bedding in my dinghy in such a serene
and absorbed frame of mind, in the still Gorai river, on an evening as
calm as this? Perhaps I shall never get back such an evening again, in
any future life. Who knows how the scene will be changed, or with what
sort of mind I shall be born. I may experience many evenings, but will
they ever, so calmly, let their hair fall on my breast with such deep love?
For how can I be the same man again? It’s strange that my greatest fear
is of being born in Europe – because in Europe there is never any chance
to bare one’s soul so loftily; or if one does, people are very critical. I’d
probably have to slave away in some factory or bank or parliament. Just

as the city streets there are hard and paved, so that horses and vehicles
can pass and trade can go on, so the mind and character have to be
solidly constructed so as to be suitable for business – with not the tiniest
place for soft grass or a superfluous creeper to lodge. A stiff, durable sort
of mind, clipped and hammered into shape by strict laws. Truly, I don’t
see this impractical, self-absorbed, free-roving mind of mine, with its
love of Imagination, as anything to be ashamed of. As I lie in the dinghy,
I don’t consider myself less important than all the more practical people
in the world. On the contrary, if I rolled up my sleeves and worked like
them, then I would consider myself inferior – inferior to all those big,
stereotyped, regimented people! But does this make a besotted young
man like me, lying in a dinghy, greater than, say, Rammohan Roy?1
7. chinnapatrābalī, Letter No. 102, Shelidah, 3 July 1893, to Indira Devi
All last night a fierce wind was howling like a street-dog – and the rain
too was incessant. Water from the fields was rushing and gurgling
towards the river from all sides in little streams. As they brought the cut
paddy back from the sandbank opposite, crossing over in the rain-sodden
ferry-boat, some of the farmers wore large straw hats, others held kaculeaves over their heads. The helmsman was soaked as he sat on the
loaded boat, rudder in hand, while sopping boatmen heaved sacks on to
the shore. Even in such terrible weather the world’s work has to go on.
Birds huddle in their nests, but men and boys have to go out. In front of
my boat there were two herd-boys: the cows they were grazing made a
crunching sound as they filled their mouths with fresh, rain-washed,
juicy green grass; their eyes were calm and tender as they swished the
flies off their backs with their tails. Rain fell on their backs continuously,
and the sticks of the herd-boys too: both were completely uncalled-for
and unjust and unnecessary, yet they bore both without complaint or
question, and went on munching. The gaze of these cows was so loving
and deep and calm and mournful. Why should human burdens be piled
on the backs of these splendid animals, through no wish of their own?
The river is rising higher every day. Almost everything that could be
seen only from the roof of the boat the day before yesterday can now be
seen if I sit at the window. Every morning I get up and see that the shore

of the river has receded further. For a long time I saw only the tops of
the distant village trees, like a leafy green cloud; now I see the whole of
them. Bank and water have gradually edged towards each other like two
shy lovers: the line that modesty draws has become so indistinct that
they have almost melted into each other. I shall enjoy sailing along this
rain-swelled overflowing river – I’m eager to untie the rope and set off.
8. cithipatra, Vol. V, Letter No. 12A, Sajadpur, 23 July 1893, to Pramatha
Chaudhuri
Bhāi Pramatha,

I’m gradually getting cut off from friends and
acquaintances. I can’t say why. It’s certainly my own fault. My nature is
perhaps getting more and more shy and self-absorbed: I’m coming to
believe that instead of being swung all the time by the interest and
sympathy of others, I would rather find stability – if not pleasure – in
remaining alone and immersed in my own self. But when all’s said and
done, man is not just a work-machine; contact with others is highly
desirable, and in the absence of warm companionship my enthusiasm for
work has greatly diminished. One can’t take on for long the task of
patching the world’s torn coat – especially if one has to do this on one’s
own, and if one’s fate is to receive more abuse than praise for this
unpaid work. It’s best to admit as much: my skin is not like a rhino’s –
slander and discouragement hurt me, perhaps, more than the average
man. I need smiles, kind comments, a little bit of praise and
encouragement to strengthen and nourish my mind! I have for the
present abandoned hope of alms from my master, and am eager to
escape from his service. Your humble servant is taking a break from his
efforts to improve the world! I have a longing to take the oil with which
I have been anointing the feet of that ungrateful animal called the
‘public’, and sniff it myself to send me to sleep for a while. Then,
perhaps, I shall wake again and return to massaging its feet. I tell you
frankly: I set out expecting to be successful. I did not have any doubt on
that score, or think myself unfit – but I’ve had to admit defeat. You are
so far away from the battlefield that my victories and defeats, hope and
disappointments must seem insignificant to you – I don’t mind if you

laugh at them.
I gather you are all now in the mountains. I sometimes feel like
accepting your hospitality, but there are one or two obstacles: above all,
after a month away from my family, I miss them, and to turn north
instead of south from Kaligram would be hard for me. If I go home for a
while, it will be easier to travel after that. But at the moment my
financial circumstances are so bad that even the small expense of going
to Darjeeling will be difficult. I hear that Loken1 will join you in a week
or so’s time. So you are fixed there for some time yet. But when will you
come down from the mountains?
Yes, I’ve noticed that kakṣa meaning ‘house’ is used in several places
in Kādambarī2 and in a couple of other Sanskrit texts. I’m progressing
slowly with Kādambarī. I’ve got through a couple of hundred pages –
there are as many pages left. It’s very late and I’ve burbled on to you for
too long, so goodbye now.
9. chinnapatrābalī, Letter No. 149, Sajadpur, 5 September 1894, to Indira
Devi
After sitting in the boat for so long it’s good to arrive at the Sajadpur
house. There are big windows and doors: light and air can come in
unimpeded from all sides. I’m looking out at the green branches of trees
and listening to the sound of bird-song. As soon as you go out on to the
southern verandah the scent of kāminī-flowers hits you, filling every
pore. I suddenly realize how hungry I was for wide open space, now that
I am here and can take my fill of it. I am the sole occupant of four huge
rooms – I sit with all the doors open. Here my mood for writing and
desire to write are like nowhere else. A living influence from the world
outside opens all doors and enters freely: light and sky and air and
sounds and scents and the green ripple of the trees and my rapturous
mood – all combine to create many stories. At midday, especially, there
is something deeply magical about this place. The warmth of the sun,
the stillness, the emptiness, the calls of the birds (especially the crows),
and long and delightful leisure together make me detached yet keenly
sensitive. I feel, somehow, that in this golden noon sunshine an Arab tale
could be made: a Persian or Arab landscape – Damascus, Samarkand, or

Bokhara; bunches of grapes, rose-gardens, nightingales singing, wine
from Shiraz, desert paths, lines of camels, horsemen and travellers, clear
fountains shaded by date-palms; towns, with narrow streets shaded by
awnings, shopkeepers in turbans and loose robes lining the roads and
selling melons and pomegranates; huge palaces, with the scent of
incense inside and enormous cushions and embroidered silks by the
windows; ladies of the harem dressed in gold-embroidered slippers and
billowy pyjamas, curling hubble-bubble pipes snaking round their feet;
Negro eunuchs in gorgeous robes keeping guard at the door; and in that
mysterious, unknown, distant land, in those opulent, marvellous,
beautiful yet awesome palaces, thousands of probable and improbable
stories made from human hopes and fears and laughter and tears!
My noons at Sajadpur are the best time for writing stories. I remember
at exactly this time, sitting at this table, I thought up and then wrote
‘The Postmaster’. I wrote, and the light and air all around, and the
murmurings of the leaves, added their own language. There are few
pleasures as great as that of composing something exactly as one wishes,
submerging oneself completely in the scene all around. This morning I
was writing a piece about nursery-rhymes – chaṛā – I got completely
absorbed in it: a great joy.1 chaṛā belong to their own separate realm in
which there are no rules or laws – a misty realm. Unfortunately the
material world, in which rules and laws have much greater influence, is
always creeping up behind me. While I was writing, there was a sudden
uproar from the office, and my misty realm was blown away – and all
my time up till lunch was taken up.
There is nothing more calculated to induce inertia than a heavy meal
at midday: our imaginative powers and higher aspirations are
completely killed by it. Because Bengalis eat so much at midday, they
cannot enjoy the intense beauty of that hour: instead they shut the door
and smoke, or chew pān and complacently settle down for a nap – and
become extremely glossy and fat as a result. But a peaceful, secluded
afternoon amidst the boundless, monotonous, flat, wheat-fields of Bengal
conveys a greater and deeper stillness than is found anywhere else. Even
in my childhood, the afternoon moved me especially. I would sit reading
on my own, on a curved settee, with the warm breeze blowing through
the open door, and no one on the roof outside. I filled those long hours

with so many dreams, so many unspoken yearnings!
10. chinnapatrāalī, Letter No. 153, ‘on the boat to Dighapatiya’,1 20
September 1894, to Indira Devi
Over the far side of the river the water-level has been going down, but
on this side it’s still rising.2 I’m getting to know it better wherever I go.
Huge trees, their trunks under water, stand with branches drooping into
the water. Right in the midst of the shady gloom of banyan and banana
trees, boats are moored and villagers bathe. Huts are dotted around in
the streaming water, their yards completely submerged. No sign of the
fields – just the tips of rice-plants poking out of the water. I’ve lost count
of all the lakes, ditches, rivers and canals I’ve sailed through. After
swishing through a paddy-field the boat suddenly entered a village pond,
where there was no more paddy, but patches of lotus with white flowers
blooming and black cormorants diving for fish. Next, we were in a small
river: paddy-fields on one bank, and on the other a village surrounded
by dense bushes, with fast streams of water snaking through them.
Water enters wherever it’s convenient: you’ve never seen land so utterly
vanquished. Villagers move by sitting in large earthenware bowls, using
pieces of split bamboo as oars – there are no banks or paths at all. If the
water rises any more it will enter their homes – then they’ll have to fix
up a scaffold and live on their roofs. The cattle will die after standing
knee-deep in water all the time, with no grass left for them to eat.
Snakes will desert their flooded holes and seek refuge on the roofs of
houses, and all the beetles and bugs and reptiles of the area, too, will
look for human company. The villages here are shaded all round by
jungle – its leaves and creepers and bushes go rotten in the water. Refuse
from houses and cowsheds floats about; rotten, stinking jute turns the
water blue; naked sickly children with swollen bellies and skinny legs
jump and splash and wallow in the water and mud; clouds of mosquitoes
buzz over fetid, stagnant water. Altogether the villages here become so
unhealthy and uncomfortable during the monsoon that it makes one feel
ill even to pass them. It’s awful to see the womenfolk in their sopping
saris rolled up to their knees, wading through water like patient beasts
in the chilly monsoon air and pouring rain. I can’t imagine how people

can keep going at all in such difficult and wretched conditions. In every
household people are plagued by rheumatism; their legs swell up; they
catch colds and fevers; sick children howl and wail incessantly – nothing
can save them, and one by one they die. Such neglect and unhealthiness
and squalor and poverty and barbarism in human habitations are terrible
to see. The villagers are victims of every kind of oppression: they have to
endure the ravages of Nature and of landlords – and no one dares to
question the age-old processes that create such unbearable misery. They
ought to flee this kind of existence completely – there is no pleasure or
beauty or advantage in it at all.
11. ciṭhipatra, Vol. I, Letter No. 16, Shelidah, June 1898, to Mrinalini
Devi
Bhāi Chuṭi,1

I found your letter when I got back from Dhaka. I’ll go
briefly to Kaligram to tie up some business, and then come to Calcutta to
make all necessary arrangements. But please, don’t worry yourself
needlessly. Try to bear every occurrence with a calm, peaceful, serene
mind. This is what I try to do all the time in the way I lead my own life.
I’m not always successful, but if you can keep calm, then perhaps –
strengthened by our mutual efforts – I also may achieve peace and
happiness of mind. Of course you are much younger than I am, and your
experiences have been much more limited, and your nature is in some
respects much more patient, much more easily controlled than mine.
Therefore you have less need than I to keep your mind free of emotional
disturbance. But in everyone’s life major crises occur, in which the
utmost patience and self-control are required. We then realize how silly
we are to complain of trivial, daily annoyances, petty aches and pains. I
shall love, and I shall do my best, and I shall do my duty by others
cheerfully – if we follow this principle, we can cope with anything. Life
does not last long, and its pleasures and travails are also constantly
changing. Wounds, setbacks, deceptions – it’s hard to bear them lightly;
but if we don’t, the burden of life gradually becomes insufferable, and it
becomes impossible to fix one’s mind on any goal or ideal. If we fail, if
we live in dissatisfaction and tension day after day, in constant conflict

with our circumstances, then our lives become completely futile. Great
calm, generous detachment, selfless love, disinterested effort: these are
what make for success in life. If you can find peace in yourself and can
spread comfort around you, you will be happier than an empress. Bhāi
Chuṭi, if you go on fretting over little things you will do harm to
yourself. Most of our troubles are self-imposed. Do not be cross at me for
lecturing you pompously like this. You do not know the intense concern
with which I am saying these things. I feel such deepening of my love
and respect for you, such a strengthening of the sympathy that ties me to
you, that the pure calm and contentment that I wish for you means more
than anything else in the world: compared to it, life’s daily troubles and
disappointments are nothing. These days I look at things with a new
kind of longing.
A woman when young can be unsettled and deluded by love, but even
from your own experience you perhaps know that at a maturer age,
amidst the extraordinary ups and downs of life, a steadier, quieter,
deeper, more real and controlled love develops. As her family grows, the
outside world recedes. So in one respect her isolation grows – ties of
intimacy seal off the married couple from the world around them. Our
souls are never more beautiful than when we can draw close and look at
each other face to face: real love begins then. There is no infatuation any
more, there is no need to see each other as gods any more, unions and
partings do not create storms of feeling any more – but near or far, in
security or in danger, in poverty or wealth, the pure and joyous light of
unqualified trust shines all around. I know you have suffered much
because of me, but I also know that because you have suffered on my
account you will one day know a greater, fuller joy. Forgiveness in love
and sharing of troubles are true happiness; the satisfaction of personal
ambition is not happiness. These days my sole desire is that our lives
should be simple and straightforward, that all around us there should be
peace and cheerfulness, that our way of life should be unostentatious
and full of bounty, that our needs should be small and our aims high and
our efforts unselfish and our work for others more important than our
work for ourselves. And even if our children gradually fall away from
the example we have set them, I hope that we may, till the end, live our
lives beautifully in mutual compassion and total, selfless, unambitious

trust. This is why I have become so eager to take you all away from
Calcutta’s stony temple of materialism, and bring you to a far and
secluded village. In Calcutta there is no opportunity to forget profit and
loss, friend and foe: one is so constantly troubled by trifling matters that
in the end all the finer purposes of life are shattered into fragments. Here
one is content with little, and one does not mistake falsehood for truth.
Here it is not hard to ‘accept with equanimity whatever may come,
happy or sad, pleasant or unpleasant’.1
P.S. Pramatha, Suren and a Gujarati friend of Pramatha’s are here at
Shelidah.2
12. cithipatra, Vol. VI, Letter No. 4, Shelidah, 17 September 1900, to
Jagadish Chandra Bose3
Dear Friend,

I was sitting quietly, flicking over the pages of a French
grammar, when your letter arrived – it made me jump and twitch like an
electrocuted dead frog! I was desperate to show your letter to Loken and
Suren, but they are far away: I must send it to them at once. Make a
declaration of war! Don’t exempt anyone. If there are any who refuse to
surrender, burn down their citadels with the fire of your arguments – as
pitilessly as Lord Roberts.1 You’ll be able to combine your various armies
into such a force that I firmly believe you will spend Christmas in
Pretoria. And after your victory, we Bengalis will share the glory of it!
There will be no need to understand what you did, no need to spend
thought, money or time on it; praise from the English in The Times
newspaper will be quite sufficient for us. Then one of our own famous
newspapers will say, ‘We’re not such little people after all’; and other
papers will say, ‘We’re advancing the frontiers of science’. No one will
give a thought to the money you need – but when you bring in the
harvest of world-wide fame we will claim you for our own. The farmer’s
labour is yours alone, but the profits will be ours; so when you win, we
shall be even more victorious than you!
There you are, all keyed up at Point A, while I sit idly and serenely at
Point B! All round me fields of sugar-cane and late rice, dewy with

advancing autumn, are waving in the breeze. You’ll be surprised to hear
that I’m drawing in a sketch-book as I sit.2 Needless to say, I’m not
preparing pictures for a Paris salon, and I haven’t the slightest fear that
some foreign National Gallery will add to the tax revenue of this country
by suddenly buying them. But just as a mother can feel extraordinary
love for her child, however ugly, so one’s heart can be attracted even to
what one cannot do well. It was when I decided to give myself wholly to
idleness that these pictures began to emerge in my mind. There is one
major obstacle to my improving: I’m having to use the rubber much
more than the pencil – so I’m getting more practice with the rubber.
Raphael can sleep happily in his grave! His fame will not be threatened
by me.
Loken has been trying to get me to accompany him on a trip to the
Simla Hills during the pūjā-holiday: but I’m not budging. It was different
when the ancient sages went to the mountain-tops to practise
meditation: nowadays you know how little peace there is in the
mountains. I hope you haven’t forgotten the friend you met on the way
to Darjeeling. I’m sticking to watching the beautiful autumn assembly of
squawking ducks on my beloved Padma. I think I remember that you
were promising to take me on a trip – to Kashmir or Orissa or Trivancore
– and indeed I’d like to smuggle myself into a chapter of your biography!
I hope to meet your wishes – I’m trying to set aside some money for a
future trip. My wife is sitting near by in an armchair and is pressing me
to bathe and eat – it’s getting late. So you must excuse me for a moment
– I shan’t be long.
Loken’s eagerness to bring out a book of my poems has cooled
somewhat since his trip to England. If he doesn’t mind, I can see to this
myself. You may be surprised that I’m drawing pictures, but no more
surprised than you will be to hear that Loken has started writing poems!
Such a state he was in – the poor fellow was finally driven to poetry!
He’s doing a verse translation of Omar Khayyam.1 A brief sample will
show you his condition:
Fools you are to give up pleasure, hoping for salvation,
Throwing yourselves in a dark gaol in search of liberation;
No longer calling debts in, for you’re sure of heavenly profit –
I, for my part, leap at any chance to line my pocket.

But by squandering his wealth on these poems, Loken has thrown away
his business prospects: he no longer cares about savings or interest – he
wants to blow everything he’s got, and I’m not willing to buy shares in
such an enterprise.
Your brother-in-law’s wife, Arya Sarala,2 has recently begun to study
Sanskrit with Bidyarnab.3 The method of learning is my own invention.
She’s improving rapidly – the pundit is delighted at having such an
intelligent pupil. I encouraged her at the beginning by saying that if she
learnt Sanskrit by my method she would master the language within a
year. I’m very pleased that she’s learning. Our present-day educated
women need to learn Sanskrit in order to balance the excessively English
education they receive.
Dear sir, I’m not very hopeful of keeping the estate at Puri for you: the
Magistrate has got his eye on it.1 My manager there has written to say
that the Puri District Board has its eye on my little plot. If the man who
is claiming the land has a case, then it won’t be possible to save it. If you
can live there and start building a house, then maybe the fellow will not
be able to get hold of it.
It’s stormy today. The sky is cloudy – every now and then there are
torrential showers of rain, and sharp gusts of wind which rattle the doors
and windows. The storm and wind and rain throw me into a holiday
mood – such as they can’t understand in Western countries, where they
are so addicted to work. I’ve done no work all week – and when it’s less
rainy, when the autumn sun shines or the south wind blows, I feel even
less like work. I close the shutters and open the door of my room – the
rain is pattering loudly as it pours down.
If you wish to get out of my expecting you to reply to this letter, then
hand it over to Sarala. If she answers on your behalf, [ shan’t complain.
Please give her my loving greetings. Don’t forget that every detail of
your work is fascinating to me. I’m thirsting for a full account of
everything that’s happening, everything that’s being said or written.
13. ciṭhipatra, Vol. VI, Letter No. 5, Calcutta, 24 or 25 October 1900, to
Jagadish Chandra Bose

Dear Friend,

Is even the ship that Caesar embarks on safe from
shipwreck? You’ve been called to so great a work – you must get well
again soon.
I’ve come to Calcutta because a nephew of mine has fallen seriously
1
ill – I’ve had no sleep for nearly eight nights. So today I felt quite
disorientated in mind and exhausted in body. Yesterday, to our great
relief, he passed the danger point; now I must look to myself. I’ve
decided to go to Bolpur-Santiniketan for a few days.
All my short stories are being published in a collected edition.2 The
first volume has appeared, but because we’re still waiting for the second
I can’t yet send the complete edition to you. But I am, as you requested,
enclosing the first volume. Most of the best stories are in the second. Of
the stories in the first volume, the most suitable for translation would
perhaps be: ‘The Postmaster’, ‘Skeleton’, ‘In the Middle of the Night’, and
‘The Neighbour’.3 But I don’t have much faith in Mrs Knight’s literary
ability.4
I have passed on all your news to the Maharajah of Tripura.5 I’m very
pleased to see the esteem he has for you. He has sent me word that to
help you in your work he is ready to give you much more than the
amount he has already promised.
Have you made up your mind about that chance of working in
England? I’ve given you my opinion on this before: don’t have any
hesitation in seizing it! If your own country is proving an impediment to
your success, then you must, however reluctantly, bid her farewell.
I’m feeling terribly tired. I earnestly pray that you recover quickly.
14. ciṭhipatra, Vol. I, Letter No. 29, Shelidah, June 1901, to Mrinalini
Devi
Bhāi Chuṭi,

With the palaver of the puṇyaha ceremony over,6 I’m
able to write again. Whenever I get the chance to write I’m like a fish
thrown into the water again from the bank. The isolation here now gives
me complete protection, the irritations of the world can no longer touch

me, and I find I can easily forgive those who are my enemies. I can well
understand why the isolation got you and the children down: if I could
get you to enjoy some of the feelings that I have here, I’d be very happy
– but it’s not something that can be given to anyone. If you leave
Calcutta and come to this isolated place, I know you will not like it for
the first few days – and later, even if you tolerate it, you will feel a
suppressed impatience within. But for me life is fruitless, somehow, in
Calcutta’s crowds: they put me in such a bad mood that every trivial
thing annoys me. I can’t preserve my peace of mind there, forgiving
people and avoiding conflict. Besides, I can’t make proper arrangements
for the children’s education – they are always so restless and inattentive.
That’s why you will have to accept this sentence of exile. Later, when I
am able, I shall choose a more suitable place than this; but I shall never
be able to bury my own nature and live in Calcutta.
The whole sky is dark with clouds, and rain has started: I’ve shut all
the downstairs windows, and am watching the rain as I write to you.
From your two-storey house in Calcutta you won’t get a sight like this.
The dark, cool, new rain on the green fields all round is beautiful to
watch. I’m writing an essay on the Meghadūta.1 If I could colour it with
some of the darkness of the teeming monsoon rain today, if I could make
permanent for my readers the way in which the green fields of my
Shelidah are turned a sort of bluey-green by the rain, that would be
something. I’ve said lots of things in lots of different ways in my writing,
but where is this gathering of clouds, this shaking of branches, this
ceaseless stream of water, this pall of shade in which, as it were, earth
and sky embrace? How easy it seems! How effortlessly the rain falls on
land and air in this empty rural solitude, how casually this cloudy,
relaxed, Aṣāṛh afternoon progresses towards dusk – yet I cannot retain a
single trace of it in my writing. No one will be able to know when and
where I was, sitting through long leisured hours in an empty house,
spinning these words out of my thoughts.
A heavy shower of rain has just finished – I must seize my chance to
post this letter.

Bibliographical Notes
The following notes are restricted to giving the Bengali titles of the
stories translated in this book, the Bengali periodicals and books in
which they were published, and previous English translations. In order
to give my selection shape and balance, I have not followed a strictly
chronological order. For the stories published in hitabādī, exact
publication dates are not known. The Bengali editions of Tagore’s short
stories referred to are: choṭa galpa, published by Kalidas Chakrabarti and
printed by him at the Adi Brahmo Samaj Press (Calcutta, 1894) bicitra
galpa, Vols. I and II, published by Kalidas Chakrabarti and printed by
Yajneshvar Ghosh at the Sahitya Press (Calcutta, 1894) kathā-catuṣṭay,
published by Kalidas Chakrabarti and printed by Yajneshvar Ghosh at
the Sahitya Press (Calcutta, 1894) galpa-daśak, published by Kalidas
Chakrabarti and printed by Yajneshvar Ghosh at the Sahitya Press
(Calcutta, 1894) galpaguccha, Vols. I and II, published by Amulyanarayan
Ray at the Majumdar Agency and printed by Debendranath Bhattacharya
at the Adi Brahmo Samaj Press (Calcutta, 1900 and 1901) An edition of
Tagore’s stories up to 1907, galpaguccha, was published in five volumes
by Indian Publishing House in Calcutta in 1908–9. Visva-Bharati’s
edition, also called galpaguccha, first appeared in 1926 (Vols. I and II)
and 1927 (Vol. III). These volumes were expanded and rearranged in
1933–4. A new edition, adding Vol. IV, was published in 1946–7, and is
the one that is currently available. All the stories I have chosen come
from Vols. I and II of the current edition, or can be found in the
complete rabīndra-racanābalī (‘Collected Works of Tagore’, Visva-Bharati,
1939–98).
For books of translations, the following abbreviations are used:
GBL

Glimpses of Bengal Life, translated and introduced by Rajani
Ranjan Sen (G. A. Nateson & Co., Madras, 1913)

HS

Hungry Stones and Other Stories (Macmillan, London and New
York, 1916)

MS

Mashi and Other Stories (Macmillan, London and New York,
1918)

ST

Stories from Tagore (Macmillan, London, Calcutta and New York,
1918)

BTS

Broken Ties and Other Stories (Macmillan, London, 1925, New
York, 1926)

MST

More Stories from Tagore (Macmillan, Calcutta, 1951)

RS

The Runaway and Other Stories, edited by Somnath Maitra (VisvaBharati, Calcutta, 1959)

HWS

The Housewarming and Other Selected Writings, edited by Amiya
Chakravarty, translated by Mary Lago, Tarun Gupta and
Amiya Chakravarty (A Signet Classic, New American Library,
New York and Toronto, 1965)

CS

Collected Stories (Macmillan, New Delhi, 1974)

TR

A Tagore Reader, edited by Amiya Chakravarty (Macmillan,
London and New York, 1961)

Information about Tagore in English can be found in Katherine Henn,
Rabindranath Tagore: A Bibliography (The American Theological Library
Association, Metuchen, N.J. and London, 1985). Full information about
the publication of the Bengali texts of the stories is given in the
Appendix to Pramathanath Bisi’s rabīndranāther chota galpa (Calcutta,
1954). I am greatly indebted to both these books. For information about
the very early translations of Tagore’s stories which appeared in the
magazine New India, I am grateful to their discoverer, Samir Roy
Chowdhury of Santiniketan. The Macmillan editions of Tagore’s stories
were published as if they were his own translations. In fact they were
generally done by friends, with or without the author’s help.1 In the
notes below, names of the Macmillan translators or co-translators are
given when known; if no name is given it should be assumed that the
translator is unknown. I have myself worked completely independently
of earlier translations, but readers may wish to look at other versions for
comparison.

The Living and the Dead (p. 31) jībita o mṛta. First published in sādhanā,
Śrābaṇ (July-August) 1892; included in bicitra galpa, Vol. II.
Translations: (1) ‘Alive and Dead’, in New India, 18 and 25 November
1901, possibly translated by the editor, Bipin Chandra Pal (2) ‘Living or
Dead’ in HS.
The Postmaster (p. 42) poṣṭmāṣṭār. First published in hitabādī, which ran
for six weeks from 30 May 1891; included in choṭa galpa. Translations:
(1) by Devendranath Mitter in The Modern Review, January 1911 (2) in
MS and CS.
Profit and Loss (p. 48) denāpāonā. First published in hitabādī (1891);
included in choṭa galpa. Translation: ‘Debts and Dues’, by Sheila
Chatterjee in Amrita Bazar Patrika, Puja Annual, 1960.
Housewife (p. 54) ginni. First published in hitabādī (1891); included in
choṭa galpa. Translation: ‘Name’, by Bhabani Bhattacharya in The Golden
Boat (Allen & Unwin, London, 1932).
Little Master’s Return (p. 58) khokābābur pratyābartan. First published in
sādhanā, Agrahāyaṇ (November–December) 1891; included in bicitra
galpa, Vol. I. Translations: (1) ‘My Lord, The Baby’, by C. F. Andrews
with the author’s help in HS (2) ‘The Return of Khokababu,’ in HWS.
The Divide (p. 65) byabadhān. First published in hitabādī (1891); included
in choṭa galpa.
Taraprasanna’s Fame (p. 70) tārāprasanner kīrti. First published in hitabādī
(1891); included in choṭa galpa. Translation: ‘Taraprasanna’s
Masterpiece’, by Sheila Chatterjee in Amrita Bazar Patrika, Puja Annual,
1960.
Wealth Surrendered (p. 76) sampatti samarpan. First published in sādhanā,
Paus (December–January) 1891–2; included in bicitra galpa, Vol. I.
Translation: ‘The Trust Property’, by Prabhat Kumar Mukherjee in The

Modern Review, May 1910, and MS.
Skeleton (p. 84) kaṅkāl. First published in sādhanā, Phālgun (February–
March) 1892; included in bicitra galpa, Vol. I. Translations: (1) ‘The
Skeleton’, by Jatindramohan Bagchi in New India, 19 May 1902 (2) ‘The
Skeleton’, by Prabhat Kumar Mukherjee in The Modern Review, March
1910 (3) ‘The Skeleton’ in MS (4) ‘A Study in Anatomy’ in GBL (5) ‘The
Skeleton’, by Rabin Sarkar in Amrita Bazar Patrika, 14 May 1961.
A Single Night (p. 91) ekrātri. First published in sādhanā, Jyaistha (May–
June) 1892; included in chota galpa. Translation: ‘The Supreme Night’,
by Jadunath Sarkar in The Modern Review, June 1912, and MS.
Fool’s Gold (p. 97) svarnamrg. First published in sādhanā, Bhādra–Āśvin
(August-September–October) 1892; included in bicitra galpa, Vol. I.
Translations: (1) ‘The Golden Mirage’ in GBL (2) ‘The Fugitive Gold’ in
BTS.
Holiday (p. 107) chuti. First published in sādhanā, Paus (December–
January) 1892–3; included in chota galpa. Translations: (1) ‘The School
Closes’ in GBL (2) ‘The Home-coming’, by C. F. Andrews with the
author’s help in HS, ST and CS.
Kabuliwallah (p. 113) kābulioyālā. First published in sādhanā, Agrahāyan
(November–December) 1892; included in choṭa galpa. Translations: (1)
‘Kabuli’, by G. Sharma in New India, 31 March and 14 April 1902 (2)
‘The Cabuliwallah’, by Sister Nivedita in The Modern Review, January
1912, and HS, ST, CS and TR1 (3) ‘The Fruit-seller’ in GBL.
The Editor (p. 121) sampādak. First published in sādhanā, Baiśākh (AprilMay) 1893; included in choṭa galpa. Translations: (1) by W. W. Pearson
in The Modern Review, August 1917, and BTS and MST (2) by Binayak
Sanyal in Amrita Bazar Patrika, 10 May 1959 (3) by Sheila Chatterjee in
Amrita Bazar Patrika, Puja Annual, 1962.

Punishment (p. 125) śāsti. First published in sādhanā, Śrābaṇ (July–
August) 1893; included in kathā-catustay. Translations: (1) ‘The
Sentence’ in GBL (2) ‘Punishment’, by Sheila Chatterjee in Amrita Bazar
Patrika, Puja Annual, 1958 (3) ‘Punishment’ in HWS.
A Problem Solved (p. 134) samasyāpūraṇ. First published in sādhanā,
Agrahāyaṇ (November–December) 1893; included in choṭa galpa.
Translations: (1) ‘The Riddle Solved’, by Prabhat Kumar Mukherjee in
The Modern Review, December 1909, and MS (2) ‘The Solution of the
Problem’, by Surendranath Tagore in The Modern Review, August 1936.
Exercise-book (p. 140) khātā. Probably first published in hitabādī (1891),
or maybe written for the abortive seventh issue of the journal. The first
known printing was in chota galpa. Translations: (1) ‘The Copybook’, by
Jiten Sen in The Statesman, 29 November 1953 (2) ‘The Notebook’ in
HWS.
Forbidden Entry (p. 146) anadhikār prabés. First published in sādhanā,
Srābaṇ (July–August) 1894; included in bicitra galpa, Vol. II.
Translations: (1) ‘The Trespass’ in GBL (2) ‘Trespass’, by Indira Debi
Choudhurani in Hindusthan Standard, Puja Annual, 1947, and RS.
In the Middle of the Night (p. 151) niśīthe. First published in sādhanā,
Māgh (January-February) 1894; included in galpa-daśak. Translations:
(1) ‘At Midnight’, by Anath Nath Mitra in The Modern Review, April 1910
(2) ‘In the Night’, by W. W. Pearson with the author’s help in The Modern
Review, December 1917, and BTS.
Unwanted (p. 162) āpad (lit. ‘trouble’, ‘botheration’: I am grateful to Miss
Srabani Paul for suggesting ‘Unwanted’ as a title). First published in
sādhanā, Phālgun (February–March) 1895; included in galpa-daśak.
Translations: (1) ‘The Castaway’ in MS and CS (2) ‘The Troublemaker’ in
HWS.
Elder Sister (p. 172) didi. First published in sādhanā, Caitra (March–April)

1895; included in galpa-dasak. Translation: ‘The Elder Sister’, by
Rashbehari Mukhopadhyay in The Modern Review, July 1910, and
(revised) in MS.
Fury Appeased (p. 181) mānbhaṅjan. First published in sādhanā, Baiśākh
(April–May) 1895; included in galpa-daśak. Translations: (1) ‘Giribala’ in
The Modern Review, May 1917, and BTS (2) ‘Appeasement’ in HWS.
Ṭhākurdā (p. 190) ṭhākurdā. First published in sādhanā, Jyaistha (May–
June) 1895; included in galpa-daśak. Translation: ‘The Babus of
Nayanjore’, by C. F. Andrews with he author’s help in HS and CS.
Guest (p. 198)
atithi. First published in sādhanā, Bhādra–Āśvin–Kārtik (August–
September–October–November) 1895; included in galpa-daśak.
Translations: (1) ‘The Wandering Guest’ in GBL (2) ‘The Runaway’, by
Surendranath Tagore in The Modern Review, September 1919, and RS and
TR (3) ‘The Guest’, by W. W. Pearson in Outward Bound, October 1921
(4) ‘The Guest’, by Sheila Chatterjee in Amrita Bazar Patrika, Puja
Annual, 1953 (5) ‘Guest’, by Lila Mujumdar in Hindusthan Standard, Puja
Annual, 1957.
Wishes Granted (p. 212) icchāpūraṇ. First published in the journal sakhā o
sāthī, Āśvin (September-October) 1895; included in pārbaṇī, an Annual
containing writings by various authors, edited by Nagendranath
Gangapadhyay, 1918–19.
False Hope (p. 217) durāśā. First published in bhāratī, Baiśākh (April–
May) 1898; included in galpaguccha, Vol. II (Majumdar Agency).
Translations: (1) ‘A Shattered Dream’, by C. F. Andrews with the author’s
help in The Modern Review, July 1917 (2) ‘False Hopes’, by Surendranath
Tagore in The Modern Review, October 1936, and RS.
Son-sacrifice (p. 229) putrayajña. First published in bhāratī, Jyaiṣṭha

(May–June) 1898; included in galpaguccha, Vol. II (Visva-Bharati).
The Hungry Stones (p. 233) kṣudhita pāṣāṇ. First published in sādhanā,
Śrābaṇ (July–August) 1895; included in galpa-daśak. Translations: (1)
‘The Hungry Stones’, by Panna Lal Basu in The Modern Review, February
1910, and HS and TR (2) ‘The Spirit of the Marble Palace’ in The
Comrade, 28 January 1917, translator unnamed (3) ‘The Hungry Stones’
in GBL.
Thoughtlessness (p. 244) durbuddhi. First published in bhāratī, Bhādra
(August–September) 1900; included in galpaguccha, Vol. I (Majumdar
Agency). Translation: ‘A Lapse of Judgement’ in HWS.
The Gift of Sight (p. 248) dṛṣṭidān. First published in bhāratī, Paus
(December-January) 1898–9; included in galpaguccha, Vol. II (Majumdar
Agency). Translation: ‘Vision,’ by C. F. Andrews with the author’s help in
HS.
Addendum
New translations of ‘The Living and the Dead’ and ‘Punishment’ have
appeared in Kalpana Bardhan’s Women, Outcastes, Peasants, and Rebels, A
Selection of Bengali Short Stories (University of California Press, 1990).
Selected Short Stories of Rabindranath Tagore, tr. by Krishna Dutta and
Mary Lago (Macmillan, 1991) includes translations of ‘The Postmaster’,
‘Little Master’s Return’, ‘Exercise-book’, ‘Punishment’ and ‘Unwanted’.
Selected Short Stories, ed. Sukanta Chaudhuri, includes translations of
‘Exercise-book’, ‘Wealth Surrendered’, ‘A Single Night’, ‘The Living and
the Dead’, ‘Kabulliwallah’, ‘Punishment’, ‘Forbidden Entry’, ‘Thakurda’,
‘The Hungry Stones’, ‘Guest’ and ‘Thoughtlessness’.

Glossary
Abdur Rahman Khan
1844–1901. Powerful modernizing Amir of Afghanistan from 1880 to
1901.
Āgamanī
See Durga.
Āgḍum Bāgḍum
āgḍum bāgḍum ghoṛāḍum sāje: Bengali nonsense/nursery rhyme
accompanied by a knee-slapping game. See Selected Poems, Notes, p. 177.
Agrahāyan
Bengali month; mid-November to mid-December; second of the two
hemanta or ‘dewy season’ months between autumn and winter.
Ālāp
Slow, meditative opening exposition of a rāga by a singer or
instrumentalist without rhythmic accompaniment.
Ālnā
Clothes-stand, preferred throughout the subcontinent to drawers or
wardrobes.
Āmṛā
Hog-plum tree; originally from Polynesia but now quite common in
India. Its sour, olive-like fruit are often pickled.
Arjuna
See Subhadra.
Aryavarta (Āryāvarta)
Upper or Northern India where the ancient Aryans settled.

Āsan
Any seat or place for sitting, for a person or a deity.
Āṣāṛh
Bengali month; mid-June to mid-July; the first of the two monsoon
months (see Śrābaṇ).
Ashram (āśram)
A residential and usually secluded religious or educational community,
associated with the ‘forest hermitages’ (tapavana) favoured by the sages
of ancient India.
Āśvin
Bengali month; mid-September to mid-October.
Ātar (attar, otto)
Perfume applied to the face and hair, made by distilling rose or jasmine
petals. Tradition has it that it was discovered by the Moghul empress
Nurjahan.
Bābā
Father; also used as a term of affection or respect to a child or an old
person.
Babu (bābu)
A title added to the name of a gentleman in Hindu Bengal – originally
given only to aristocrats (see ‘ hākurdā’) but later to the whole of the
nineteenth-century educated class. It was used derogatively by the
British (‘Bengali babu’), but is not at all pejorative in current Bengali
usage.
Babuji (bābuji)
‘-ji’ is a common honorific suffix in North India, which is why the
Hindusthani Princess in ‘False Hope’ adds it to ‘Babu’ when addressing a
Bengali gentleman.
Baiśākh
First month of the Bengali year; mid-April to mid-May; summer in

Bengal.
Bakul
Small, white, sweet-scented spring flower.
Baṛi
Small conical ball made of pigeon-pea paste and dried in the sun before
cooking.
Baṛobau
‘Elder wife’ – the elder of two daughters-in-law in an extended family.
Baudidi
‘Wife-sister’ – term applied to a wife by in-laws junior to her in an
extended family; often abbreviated to Baudi.
Baul (bāul)
Heterodox, wandering religious sect in Bengal, famous for their songs. In
‘The Postmaster’ (p. 42) the band of Bauls is ‘intoxicated’ with ganjikā
(ganja), not alcohol.
Baumā
A way of addressing the wife in an extended family.
Bauṭhākrun
Term applied to the wife of a Brahmin by servants and others holding
her in respect; also a synonym for Baudidi.
Bel
Wood-apple or marmelos, a tree from whose hard-shelled fruit a
delicious ‘sherbet’ can be made. Bel or beli is also the name of the
Arabian jasmine, a shrub with sweet-smelling white flowers that bloom
from March to June.
Bhababhuti (Bhababhūti)
Famous Sanskrit poet of the seventh or eighth century, author of malatimādhava and uttarrāmcaritā.

Bhādra
Bengali month; mid-August to mid-September.
Bhagavata (Bhāgavata)
See Krishna.
Bhāi
‘Brother’, but used as a friendly informal appellation among women as
well as men.
Bhāiphõṭā
Festival corresponding to Bhaiduja in Northern India, when sisters put
sandal-paste marks (tilak) on the foreheads of their brothers and wish
them a long and prosperous life; brothers bless their sisters; and presents
of clothes are exchanged. The Sanskrit name for this festival is bhrātridvītiya (‘brother-second’), as it is held on the second day after the day of
the new moon in autumn when Diwali (Kālī-pūjā/Syāma-pūjā in Bengal)
is celebrated.
Bhairavī
A calm and pensive morning rāga, named after Shiva’s consort.
Bibisaheb (Bibisāheb)
A rather archaic respectful term applied to a Muslim married lady. See
Saheb.
Brahma (Brahmā)
Creator and first god of the classical Hindu triad, associated with
primeval fire. Brahmins are supposed to be able to curse people with ‘the
fire of Brahma’.
Brahmin (Brāhmaṇ)
First of the four classical Hindu caste-divisions (Brāhmaṇ, Kṣatriya,
Vaiśya and Śudra); the ‘priestly caste’ associated with privilege, grace,
purity, excellence, etc. By giving land to Brahmins (‘A Problem Solved’)
or feeding them on festive occasions (‘Son-sacrifice’) or giving succour to
them (‘Unwanted’), one can acquire merit and improve one’s next
incarnation.

Caitra
The last month of the Bengali year; mid-March to mid-April.
Caṇḍimaṇḍap
Strictly, a shrine for the goddess Chandi, but it normally refers to the
roofed structure used for community gatherings and festive occasions in
Bengali villages.
Chadar (cādar)
A sheet of cloth carried over the shoulder or worn round the shoulders
like a shawl.
Champa (c pā)
The champak tree, with golden yellow flowers that bloom in summer.
Chanakya (Cānakya)
The cānakyaslokas are a collection of Sanskrit couplets on social morality
attributed to Cāṇakya, a scholar in the court of Chandragupta Maurya
(320–297 BC). Under the name Kauṭilya he is also supposed to have
written the famous arthaśāstra (treatise on economics). The cynicism of
Cānakya’s precepts has earned him the title ‘the Machiavelli of India’.
Chandimangal (caṇḍimaṅgal)
See Kabikankan.
Chandra (Candra)
The moon or moon-god.
Chapkan (cāpkān)
Loose, long robe; formal or official Persian-style dress favoured by the
well-to-do in nineteenth-century Bengal.
Chaprassi (cāprāsi)
An office messenger or peon (piyan).
Choga (cogā)
Loose, Persian-style outer-garment worn over the chapkan (q.v.).

Choṭo Mā
‘Young mother’ – term applied, usually by servants, to the youngest wife
in an extended family.
Choṭobau
‘Younger wife’ – the younger of two daughters-in-law in an extended
family.
Dādā
‘Elder brother’; also short both for Dādāmośāy, ‘maternal grandfather’,
and Ṭhākurdā, ‘paternal grandfather’, and therefore often applied in a
jocular or informal manner to any older man; also added to names by
servants addressing the son or ‘young master’ in a family (e.g.,
‘Phatikdādā’ in ‘Holiday’).
Dadababu (Dādābābu)
Respectful and affectionate term applied to a gentleman by a lesseducated person (see ‘The Postmaster’).
Damayanti (Damayantī)
See Nala.
Dashu Ray (Dāśu Rāy)
1806–57. Greatest writer of Bengali p cāli, a genre combining music,
dance and poetry, telling stories of Radha and Krishna and other
traditional subjects, often in an erotic, humorous or satirical way.
Deś
A light, night rāga, often combined with the Mallar or ‘monsoon’ group
of rāgas to create composite ‘Deś-Mallar’ rāgas.
Devanāgarī
See Sarasvati.
Dharma
A key word in Hindu tradition, meaning such things as duty, law, justice,
righteousness, piety, scriptural rules, morality, religion etc. See Selected
Poems, Notes, pp. 175–6.

Dhoti (dhuti)
Traditional white loincloth worn by Hindu men. See p. 190, n. 1.
Didi
‘Elder Sister’; abbreviated to ‘di’, it is often respectfully added to Bengali
women’s names.
Didimā
Maternal grandmother or great-aunt.
Dom
One of the pañcama (‘fifth’) group of ‘untouchable’ castes outside the
main Hindu castes. The Doms are traditionally scavengers, corpseremovers and suppliers of wood for burning the dead.
Durbar (darbār)
A formal levee or meeting in a royal court, when the monarch listens to
petitions.
Durga (Durgā)
Bengal’s most popular goddess. As Shiva’s consort or śakti she dwells on
Mount Kailas and is also known as Uma and Parvati (‘daughter of the
mountain’). Durgā-pūjā in October–November is Bengal’s chief religious
festival ending with the ritual immersion of the images of Durga made
specially for it. The song that Uma hears in ‘Exercise-book’ is an example
of the āgamanī songs that are sung to commemorate Durga’s arrival in
her parents’ home at the beginning of the festival. The reference in ‘The
Gift of Sight’ (p. 248) is to the third eye which Durga (like Shiva) has on
her forehead.
Gāmchā
A kind of scarf or napkin, sometimes worn round the waist as a lungi or
loincloth.
Ganesh (Gaṇeśa)
Elephant-headed god, son of Shiva and Parvati, bringer of good luck and
prosperity. Gaṇeś-pūjā in April is observed by traders and shopkeepers.

Gazal (gajal)
Popular form of love poem or song, Arabic or Persian in origin, much
favoured by Urdu poets.
Ghāṭ
See Introduction, pp. 21 f.
Gītāgovinda
See Jayadev.
Gopī
See Krishna.
Govinda Das
Medieval Bengali author of Vaishnava padābalī (songs about Radha and
Krishna).
Hanu
See Manu.
Haridas
Hero of Haridāser guptakathā, an adaption by Bhubanchandra
Mukhopadhyay of W. M. Reynolds’ novel Joseph Wilmot (1854). The
book first appeared in serial form in 1871–73 and was popularly
regarded as ‘adult’ reading for married couples, which is why Uma in
‘Exercise-book’ finds it under her brother’s wife’s pillow. There is further
evidence of the popularity of Reynolds’ novels in Bengal, in
‘Taraprasanna’s Fame’, p. 73, where the reference is to London Mystery (8
vols, 1849–56).
Hilsa (iliś)
A fish farmed and eaten in Bengal, growing up to eighteen inches in
length. It lives in the sea, but comes up the rivers to spawn.
Hookah (hũkā)
‘Hubble-bubble’ or water-pipe which Persian influence introduced into
Bengal; rarely seen today.

Indra
King of the gods in Vedic times; less important in classical Hinduism, but
associated with thunder and rainbows (indradhanu, ‘Indra’s bow’). He
drives a chariot drawn by two tawny horses, and also rides the
prototypal divine elephant Airāvata.
Ishvarchandra Vidyasagar
1820–91. Famous Principal of Sanskrit College in Calcutta, a major force
in nineteenth-century Bengali educational and social reform, and a
pioneering writer of Bengali prose. The first part of his barṇaparicay
(primer) includes two boys, ‘Gopal’ and ‘Rakhal’, who have become
proverbially associated with good behaviour and bad behaviour
respectively. kathāmālā – a Bengali version of Aesop as told by Revd
Thomas James – was another of his many books for schoolchildren (see
‘Exercise-book’, p. 140).
Istadevatā
Patron god that a Hindu chooses from the pantheon as the deity to
whom he offers special prayers.
Jamidār/Jamidāri
See Zamindar.
Jayadev (Jayadeva)
Twelfth-century Sanskrit poet, born in Bengal, famous for his
Gītāgovinda, a dramatic poem about Radha and Krishna.
Jhāu
The tamarisk – an evergreen shrub or small tree, with feathery branches
and thin leaves.
Jobbā
A long, loose, informal Persian-style robe.
Jyaiṣṭha
Bengali month; mid-May to mid-June; the second of the two summer
months.

Kabikankan (Kabikaṅkaṇ)
Honorific title given to the great sixteenth-century Bengali poet
Mukunduram Chakravarti. His caṇḍimaṅgal is regarded as the finest
example of maṅgalkābya, a genre of Bengali narrative poem glorifying
Bengal’s local deities – Chandi, Manasa, Dharma, Shitala and others.
Kabirāj
Physician following the traditional Indian Ayurvedic system of medicine.
Kabuliwallah (kābulioyālā)
A native of Afghanistan or Kabul – usually, in the Indian context, an
itinerant trader or hawker.
Kacu
The taro – a coarse herbacious plant cultivated for its tubers.
Kadamba
A large tree with sweet-scented, yellow-orange flowers that bloom in the
rainy season.
Kailas (Kailāsa)
See Durga.
Kaistha (Kāystha)
Hindu caste, known as ‘the writer caste’, who have traditionally been
writers, scholars, lawyers and judges. They overlap with the two main
caste divisions, being sometimes classed as Kṣatriyas, sometimes as
Śudras (see Brahmin, Shudra, Dom).
Kākimā (kākī)
Aunt; wife of one’s father’s younger brother.
Kāl-baiśākhī
A strong wind that blows in the afternoons in the summer month of
Baisākh, and sometimes causes sudden short storms.
Kali
The ‘age of Kali’ (kali-yūga) is the age of mankind in the sixth

millennium of which we are at present living. It is the last of four yūgas
that make up a kalpa or ‘day of Brahma’. The age of Kali is tragically
degenerate compared to the satya-yūga (‘age of Truth’) which was the
first of the four yūgas – hence the evils and sufferings in our present
world. ‘Kali’ is not to be confused with the mother-goddess Kālī.
Kalidasa (Kālidāsa)
Foremost poet and dramatist of Sanskrit literature; often associated with
the court of Chandra Gupta II (AD 375–414), though some scholars have
placed him in the first or second century BC. His most famous works are
the Meghadūta (‘Cloud-messenger’), a poem in which a yakṣa (see
Kubera), absent from his beloved, asks a cloud to carry a message of
love to her; Kumārasambhava, a poem about the begetting of Kartik
(q.v.) to destroy the demon Taraka; and the greatest of all Sanskrit plays,
Śakuntalā.
Kalighat (Kālīghāt)
Hindu temple in Calcutta dedicated to the bloodthirsty mother-goddess
Kali (Kāli), and associated with animal sacrifice. Tagore’s famous play
bisarjan (‘Sacrifice’) attacks the Kali cult.
Kāminī
A large shrub bearing bunches of sweet-smelling white flowers which
bloom at night and are shed by morning. It blossoms mainly during the
rain, and is often cut into shapes in ornamental gardens.
Kapāṭi
A game indigenous to India. Two teams stand on opposite sides of a line;
a player crosses the line, and tries to touch an opposing player while
holding his breath and uttering repetitive sounds such as ḍu-ḍu-ḍu-ḍu. If
he touches an opponent before running out of breath, the opponent is
declared ‘dead’; if the opposing players physically prevent him from
returning to his side of the line, he is declared dead.
Kartik (Kārtik, Kārtikeya)
God of war and ruler of the planet Mars, son of Shiva and Parvati,
created to destroy the demon Taraka (see Kalidasa). Also the name of

the seventh Bengali month, mid-October to mid-November.
Kashidas (Kāśirām Dās)
Seventeenth-century Bengali poet known as the author and compiler of
the most popular medieval Bengali version of the Mahābhārata, though
his nephew Nanadaram and others had a hand in it.
Kathāmālā
See Ishvarchandra Vidyasagar.
Kedārā
Large Persian-style armchair.
Kharia (Khaṛiyā, Khaṛe)
Another name for the Jalangi river that runs into the Bhagarathi
(Hooghly) west of Krishnanagar. Further north, the Bhairab connects it
with the Padma (see Map, p. 323).
Khokā
An affectionate term for the youngest son in a Bengali family.
Khuṛā
Uncle; younger brother of one’s father.
Kīrtan
In Bengal a kīrtan is usually a simple religious song or bhajan (hymn),
with none of the complexity of classical vocal music.
Koel (kokil)
Bird with a characteristic shrill call, rising up the scale, ending with a
gentler cooing sound; very commonly heard in Bengal. Often
(misleadingly) translated as ‘cuckoo’ because it belongs to the same
order (cuculiformes).
Krishna (Kṛṣṇa)
Much-loved incarnation of Vishnu, famous for his childhood in Vraj, his
flute-playing, his sporting with milkmaids (gopīs) in Vrindavan on the
banks of the Yamuna, his love-affair with Radha, and his heroic role in

the Mahābhārata. His life story is told in the tenth book of the thirteenthcentury Bhāgavata-purāṇa. Radha’s love for him is the main focus of
Bengali Vaishnava devotion, and inspired numerous padābalī (‘lyrics’) in
medieval Bengal. In dramatic versions of the Radha–Krishna story the
mānbhañjan is the ‘breaking’ (bhañjan, i.e. appeasement or placation) of
Radha’s ‘pique’ (mān) at Krishna’s neglectful behaviour. Tagore’s story
‘Fury Appeased’ alludes to this both in its title and its content. A
‘Krishna-rosary’ (jap-mālā) is carried by pious Vaishnavas as an aid to
prayer (see ‘A Problem Solved’, p. 138).
Krittibas (Kṛttibās)
Celebrated poet, born in the late fourteenth or early fifteenth century,
compiler and author of the medieval Bengali Rāmāyaṇa, the most
popular of all medieval Bengali poems.
Kubera
Originally a Vedic lord of evil spirits whom Brahma made one of the
guardian deities of the world. He is lord of all gold, silver and gems, and
is served by the yakṣas – a class of elemental beings, mostly benevolent
though sometimes evil. The chief yakṣas guard Kubera’s treasure-hoards
(cf. ‘Wealth Surrendered’) in Alaka in the Himalayas; and it is a yakṣa
who is the speaker in Kalidasa’s celebrated Meghadūta (see Kalidasa).
Kulin (Kulīn)
Brahmin sub-caste whose practice of polygamy was notorious. Parents
would marry their daughters to Kulins as an act of religious merit, and
the Kulins would profit from the dowries. Kulin polygamy was never
forbidden by law, but in response to changing social conditions – and
campaigns against it – it died out early in the twentieth century.
Kumārasambhava
See Kartik and Kalidasa.
Kuri
Strictly speaking, a caste associated with bird-catching, but also a
synonym for the Mayara or Madhukuri ‘confectioner caste’ of Bengal,
who as suppliers of sweets to Brahmins are high or ‘clean’ Shudra castes

(q.v.). The Rui brothers in ‘Punishment’ are landless labourers – showing
how the identification of a caste with a particular trade has been much
eroded in modern India.
Kurta (kortā)
Indian shirt with long sleeves and collarless neck, cut long to hang down
below the hips.
Kush and Lab (Kuśa and Lava)
Twin sons of Rama and Sita who were brought into the ashram of
Valmiki, author of the Rāmāyaṇa. In the last section of the epic, they are
taught to sing the story of Rama, so kuś-laber gān are songs telling the
story of Rama sung by Kush and Lab.
Lagi
A long pole, normally of bamboo, used to punt or steer a traditional
Bengali river-boat.
Lakh (lākh, lakṣa)
A hundred thousand; generally used in the subcontinent when referring
to large numbers.
Lāthi
Stick used as a baton or truncheon.
Lāṭhiyāl
Guard or bodyguard carrying a lāṭhi, or a person skilled in fighting with
lāṭhis.
Mā
‘Mother’; used also to address married women with a rural or peasant
background; also used as an imprecation (‘Mā! Mā!’) because the
Mother-goddess is commonly worshipped in Bengal. See Durga.
Madan (Madana)
Name for Kama, the Hindu god of love; equivalent to Cupid or Eros.
Madanmohan Tarkalankar

1817–58. Bengali poet with an ornate Sanskritic style, some of whose
poems became well-known anthology pieces.
Mādhabī
Creeper with pink or red or pale flowers that bloom from February to
September.
Māgh
Bengali month; mid-January to mid-February.
Mahabharata (Mahābhārata)
Great classical epic of India, attributed to the poet Vyāsā, but probably
created over many generations. See Kashidas and Krishna.
Mallar
See Deś.
Mantra
A sacred verse of scripture, or any spell or formula used in Hindu
worship and ritual.
Manu
Known as the Lawgiver, mythical author of a canonical Hindu code of
law and jurisprudence; identified with the first of fourteen ‘Manus’ or
semi-divine progenitors of mankind. The ‘sons of Manu’ therefore means
those people who are law-abiding, as opposed to those whom Tagore, in
‘The Editor’ (p. 123), wittily calls the ‘sons of Hanu’, i.e. people with the
capacity for subversion and havoc associated with the monkey-chief
Hanuman. (In fact Hanuman had no children: Tagore is playing with
words.)
Māsī
Aunt; mother’s sister or cousin-sister.
Māṣṭārmaśāy
‘Master-sir’ – a common name or term of address for a teacher or tutor.
Māṭhākrun
A term that might be used by a servant addressing the (Brahmin)

mistress of the house where he is employed.
Meghnadūta
See Kalidasa.
Meghnād-badh kābya
‘The poem of the slaying of Meghnād’ – a brilliantly original epic based
on the Rāmāyaṇa, but distorting its traditional values, by Michael
Madusūdan Datta (1824–73), the founder of modern Bengali poetry and
drama. The difficulty of Madusūdan’s language and the epic’s classic
status had tended to make it something of a grind for Bengali students.
Tagore himself disliked it when he was young.
Memsāheb
The term by which the wives of British sāhebs (q.v.) were generally
known in British India.
Mohanbhog
A sort of porridge made by boiling cornflour in milk.
Mohar
Gold coin used in Moghul times, and also struck by the East India
Company; phased out as a currency by the British in the 1840s, but
preserved in treasure-hordes (see ‘Wealth Surrendered’, p. 81).
Moktār (mukhtar)
A legally appointed representative or attorney.
Mudrā
Any kind of coin, generally thought of as gold and/or obsolete (see ‘The
Hungry Stones’, p. 240).
Munsiff (munseph)
A Moghul judge, but under the legal system established by the British in
India an officer trying suits in the lowest civil court.
Nala and Damayanti (Damayantī)
Famous star-crossed lovers whose story is included in the Makābhārata.

When Nala, king of Nishadha, first heard of Damayanti’s beauty, he sent
a swan (whose life he had once saved) to find her (see ‘Unwanted’, p.
169).
Nāmābali
A scarf with the names of deities printed on it, worn by Vaishnavas and
other pious Hindus.
Namaskār
Hindu greeting, accompanied by the folding of the hands in a prayer-like
position; equivalent to the Muslim salaam (q.v.).
Nim tree
The margosa – a large tree with beautifully clustered narrow leaves.
P cāli
See Dashu Ray.
Padābalī
See Govinda Das and Krishna.
Paisa
Small coin/unit of currency; now (since 1957) a cent of a rupee, though
formerly there were 16 annas and 64 paisa to a rupee.
Pān
Leaf of the betel-pepper plant, commonly chewed in India with betel-nut
(from the betel palm, a different tree) and shell-lime, and spices added
to taste.
Parvati (Pārvatī)
See Durga.
Peepul (aśvattha)
A large tree, related to the banyan; also known as bodhi-taru (‘perfectknowledge tree’) or bo tree, because it was under it that Gautama
became the Buddha (‘enlightened one’).

Peon (piyan)
See Chaprassi.
Pisimā
Aunt; father’s sister.
Praṇām
Hindu obeisance, an expression of deep respect in which one ‘takes the
dust of a person’s feet’ – i.e., one touches a person’s feet and then one’s
forehead with one’s right hand.
Pugree (pāgṛi)
A piece of cloth worn round the head; a turban.
Pūjā
Hindu worship: anything from an offering of flowers to a deity or a
ritual performed to honour a particular god or goddess on a special day,
to a full-scale religious festival. See Durga and Ganesh.
Pundit (Paṇḍit)
A learned Sanskrit teacher, or a scholar of language and literature; used
in English now for any kind of self-appointed expert; also a term applied
honorifically to Brahmins, who are traditionally the only people
permitted to teach Sanskrit.
Puṇyaha
A special day on which a landlord solemnly collects rents from tenants
for the ensuing year.
Radha (Rādhā)
See Krishna.
Rāga (rāg)
In Indian music, a rāga is a group of notes, usually associated with a
particular mood, time, season or deity, around which a singer or
instrumentalist improvises.
Rājā

King; but it can mean just a landlord or zamindar (q.v.). Tagore would
have been a rājā to his Shelidah tenants.
Rām Rām (He Rām, etc.)
Often said by Hindus as an imprecation or prayer. Gandhi died with ‘He
Rām’ on his lips.
Rama (Rāma)
Hero of Valmiki’s great Sanskrit epic the Rāmāyaṇa, and a model of
human goodness and prowess, just as his wife Sita represents perfect
Hindu womanhood.
Ramayana (Rāmāyaṇa)
See Krittibas.
Raybahadur (Rāybāhādur)
Honorific title conferred on eminent Hindu citizens in pre-British
(Moghul) and British India. Muslims were given the title Khanbahadur.
Saheb (sāheb)
‘Sir’; a term of respect introduced in Moghul times, and still used when
referring to Muslims. Cf. ‘Babu’, the Hindu equivalent. The British in
India also came to be known as sāhebs or sahibs. A kālo sāheb or ‘brown
sāheb’ is a derogatory term for an Anglicized Indian.
Sakhī
Female friend or confidante to a woman.
Sāl
A tall tree that grows in the dry climate of West Bengal or Bihar. It is
valuable for its hardwood and resin, and sál-forests are now protected by
law.
Salaam (selām)
Muslim greeting, accompanied by the bowing of the head and touching
of the brow with the right hand.
Śāmlā

A kind of turban worn by clerks and pleaders in nineteenth-century
Bengal – hence Pyarimohan’s jibe in ‘Exercise-book’ (p. 144).
Sānāi
Reed instrument traditionally associated with wedding festivities.
Sandeś
Very popular Bengali sweetmeat made from curdled milk.
Sannyāsī
A celibate Hindu holy man, fakir or ascetic; usually itinerant and
dependent on alms; sometimes disreputably dealing in blessings,
amulets, quack remedies, etc.
Sannyāsinī
A female sannyāsī.
Sāraṅgī
Musical instrument played with a bow like a violin.
Sarasvati (Sarasvatī)
Chief wife of Brahma (q.v.); goddess of wisdom and science, of speech
and music, and deviser of the devanāgarī script for Sanskrit.
Seer (ser)
Traditional unit of weight (about 2 lbs); used for liquids (milk, etc.) as
well as dry stuffs.
Śephālī
A tree with small white flowers on orange-coloured stalks. Its flowers
bloom mainly in autumn; they open out at night, falling at dawn to form
a white carpet under the tree. According to the Viṣṇu-purāṇa it was
originally a princess called Parijat, who fell in love with the sun. When
she was deserted by him, she was burnt and the tree grew out of her
ashes. Krishna brought it from heaven to earth as a present for his wife
Satyabhama.
Shashti (Ṣaṣṭī)

A Bengali local deity who protects and promotes babies. A child is born
‘through the grace of Shashti’ (see ‘Fool’s Gold’, p. 98).
Shastra (śāstra)
The Shastras are the smṛti (‘remembered’) scriptures of the Hindus in
which all branches of knowledge are codified, as opposed to the śruti
(‘heard’) texts normally known as the Veda (q.v.). They are humanly
created works of doctrine and theology, or treatises on law, medicine,
etc., rather than directly revealed Holy Writ.
Shiva (Śiva)
Major Hindu god, known as the ‘Destroyer’ – as opposed to Brahma the
Creator and Vishnu the Preserver – but with a great range of often
contradictory characteristics. In ‘Taraprasanna’s Fame’ (p. 75)
Dakshayani speaks of her ‘Shiva-like’ husband because in Bengali
popular tradition Shiva is seen as childlike, ignorant of the world’s
complexities, easily pleased.
Shudra (śudra)
Fourth and ‘lowest’ of the four classical Hindu castes; traditionally
labourers, cultivators, fishermen and servants. They have been subject to
oppression, and some of them pursue trades regarded as ‘unclean’, such
as oil-making and leather-working, but they have not been traditionally
regarded as total ‘outcastes’. See om.
Sita (Sītā)
See Rama.
Śiuli
Another name for the śephālī-flower (q.v.).
Śrābaṇ
Bengali month; mid-July to mid-August; the second of the two monsoon
months (see Āṣāṛh).
Subhadra
Sister of Krishna (q.v.). Arjuna, third of the Pandava princes in the great
epic of India, the Mahābhārata, fell in love with her when he visited

Krishna in his kingdom of Dvaraka. Krishna’s brother Balaram wanted
her to marry Duryodhana, who was a Kaurava and thus an enemy of the
Pandavas; but Krishna encouraged Arjuna to abduct her. Indraprastha
was the famous capital city that the Pandavas built on the banks of the
Yamuna. The reference in ‘Skeleton’ (p. 86) is to a moment of the battle
of Kurukshetra when Subhadra appeared in a chariot to rescue Arjuna
from the fray.
Śvaśur-bāṛi
‘Father-in-law’s house’, where a bride goes to live. It is also used as a
word for prison; so a pun is intended in ‘Kabuliwallah’ (p. 117).
Śyālikā
‘Sister-in-law’. The words for brother-in-law and sister-in-law are terms
of mild abuse in Bengali; there is also traditionally a bantering
relationship between husband and his wife’s sister. Marrying a sister-inlaw is permissible for a widower, and a sister-in-law is often jokingly
called an ‘additional wife’. Thus when Mini in ‘Kabuliwallah’ (p. 113)
asks her father what relation her mother is to him, ‘sister-in-law’ is the
only one he can suggest. Other relationships (uncle/niece, nephew/aunt
etc.) would be taboo.
Tatya Tope (Ramchandra Pandurang)
1813–59. Commander-in-chief of the rebel forces during the Indian
Mutiny. After defeat in the battle of Gwalior (19 June 1857) he took to
guerrilla warfare in central India, eluding capture for nearly two years.
He was hanged by the British on 18 April 1859, and is remembered as a
great patriot and military genius.
Thākur
‘Lord’; a term used to address a Brahmin, or a (male) deity or idol.
‘Tagore’ is an Anglicized form of thākur.
hākurdā
Paternal grandfather; also used to address any old man, in a jocular or
slightly patronizing way, as in the story ‘ hākurdā’.
Thākurmā

Paternal grandmother or a respectful way of addressing an elderly
Brahmin lady.
Thumri
A love-song, frequently light and popular in character; often used in
dance and theatrical shows. A ‘Lucknow ṭhuṃri’ (‘Guest’, p. 201) might
well be subject to Perso-Arabic influences.
Ṭol
Traditional Indian grammar school, where Sanskrit would be learnt from
a Brahmin pundit.
Uma (Umā)
See Durga
Vaishnava (Vaiṣṇava)
A follower of Vaishnavism, the religion that was the main expression in
Bengal of the bhakti (devotional) tendency in Hinduism that developed
in India in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. See Krishna.
Varuna (Varuna)
Vedic god who sustained the moral order of the cosmos; he was later
dethroned by Indra to become the Hindu god of the sea, worshipped by
fishermen.
Veda
The primary scriptures of Hinduism, regarded as divine in origin: they
include the Mantras (q.v.) used in rituals, the Brāhmaṇa (priestly
manuals), the Āraṇyaka (treatises for hermits and saints), and the
Upaniṣads (general philosophic treatises).
Vedanta (vedānta)
One of the six orthodox systems of Hindu philosophy, founded on the
Upanisads (see Veda). It was first formulated by the philosopher
Bādarāyaṇa, and is also known as uttara-mīmāṃsā (Later Mīmāṃsā) to
distinguish it from pūrva-mīmāṃsā (Early Mīmāṃsā) – another
philosophic school.

Vidya (Vidyā)
The heroine of the Vidyāsundara, a narrative poem by the eighteenthcentury Bengali poet Bharatchandra Ray. Her sakhī or confidante became
a popular character in yātrā performances of the story.
Vraj (Vraja)
See Krishna.
Vrindavan (Vṛndāvana)
See Krishna.
Yaksa
See Kubera and Kalidasa.
Yama
Vedic and Hindu god of death, and punisher of souls after death, whose
city Yamapuri is the Indian Hades.
Yamuna (Yamunā, Jumna)
North Indian tributary of the Ganges; Delhi and Krishna’s Vrindavan are
situated on its banks, and it joins the Ganges at the sacred saṅgam
(confluence) at Allahabad.
Yātrā
Popular form of dramatic entertainment in Bengal, traditionally
performed by travelling troupes of players and presenting in song,
speech and dance traditional stories mixed with topical comment or
satire.
Yogī
Hindu mystic; seeker of samādhi or communion with the godhead
through the various systems of yoga.
Yoginī
A female yogī.
Zamindar (jamidār)
Under the Moghul system Bengali zamindars were landholders and

revenue-collectors, but under the controversial ‘Permanent Settlement’ of
Lord Cornwallis in 1793 they were transformed into landowners, and the
Government’s land-revenue demand was permanently fixed. In Muslim
East Bengal most zamindars (like the Tagores) were Hindus, with houses
in Calcutta, and were therefore often absent from their jamidāris. This
was brought to an end by Partition in 1947, and successive land reforms
have removed the zamindari system from West Bengal and Bangladesh.
Zenana
A ‘harem’ in a Muslim palace, but in a smaller household equivalent to
the antaḥpur or inner quarters where women lived in varying degrees of
purdah (pardā – the word means ‘curtain’). This practice was (and is)
observed in Muslim households, and as a legacy of Persian influence in
Moghul times was also common in nineteenth-century Hindu
households. Loosely the antaḥpur is simply the more private part of a
house, closed to strangers.

1. Later published as one volume, kathā o kāhinī (1908), with some narrative poems from earlier
books added.

1. Tagore’s father Debendranath was ācārya (‘Minister’) of the Brahmo Samaj, the Reformed
Hindu Church founded by Rammohan Roy. Following a schism in 1866, Debendranath’s branch
of the Samaj was known as the Adi (‘Original’) Brahmo Samaj. Rabindranath was its Secretary
from 1884 to 1912.
2. Letter of 22 October 1895 to Thakurdas Mukhopadhyay, quoted by Prasanta Kumar Paul,
rabijībanī, Vol. IV (Calcutta, 1988), p. 77.

1. These comments were collected by Pulinbihari Sen, bibliographer of Tagore. They can also be
found in the Appendix to Pramathanath Bisi’s study of Tagore’s short stories, rabīndranāther choṭa
galpa (Calcutta, 1954).
2. Conversation with Jitendralal Bandyopadhyay, May 1909.

1. The interview was published in Forward magazine, 23 February 1935.
2. chinnapatrābalī, Letter No. 24, June 1891.

1. Ibid., Letter No. 17, February 1891.
2. He used Baul patterns and tunes in the patriotic songs he wrote for the svadeśī campaign
against Curzon’s partition of Bengal in 1905. Close study of the Baul songs did not, however,
come till the Gitanjali period and after (1914 onwards). See Ghulam Murshid, rabīndrabiśver
pūrbabaṅga pūrbabaṅge rabīnd-racarcā (Dhaka, 1981), pp. 78, 137–41.

1. See Appendix B, Letter No. 1.
2. ‘Shelidah’ is an Anglicized form. In Bengali it is śilāidaha.

1. See Appendix B, Letter No. 2.
2. Letter to Pramatha Chaudhuri, ciṭhipatra, Vol. V, p. 154.
3. Glimpses of Bengal, an abridged English translation by Surendranath Tagore of some of the
letters, was published by Macmillan in 1921. chinnapatrābalī, a fuller edition of Tagore’s letters to
Indira Devi, was published by Visva-Bharati in 1960.

1. The venture was never very successful, and was eventually wound up in 1901, leaving Tagore
with heavy debts.
2. Rathindranath Tagore, On the Edges of Time (Calcutta, 1958), p. 23.

1. Letter to Mrinalini Devi, ciṭhipatra, Vol. I, p. 96.

1. His objectivity may derive from his non-Bengali origins (he was a North Indian Muslim),
though his mastery of Bengali was complete.

1. See Glossary.

1. galpaguccha, Vol. IV, granthaparicay, pp. 306–7.
2. Buddhaeva Bose, prabana saṃkalan (Calcutta, 1966), p. 60.

1. galpaguccha, Vol. IV, granthaparicay, p. 306.
2. The three essays which later made up his book lok-sāhitya (‘Folk-literature’) were published in
sādhanā (1894 and 1895) and bhāratī (1899).
3. When Muslims do appear, however, they are treated with respect: Achimaddi and his mother
in ‘A Problem Solved’, for example, or the ‘old Muslim’ who comes for medical treatment in ‘The
Gift of Sight’. In ‘The Hungry Stones’ and ‘False Hope’ we find romantic fascination with preBritish Islamic culture in India.

1. See p. 4, n. 1.
2. chinnapatrābalī, Letter No. 93, 2 May 1893.

1. Ibid., Letter No. 128, 6 July 1894.
2. This was almost the first time any of them had appeared in print. Their very first appearance
was in Mohitchandra Sen’s Introduction to the second edition of kābya-grantha (‘Collected
Poems’, 1903) where two ‘unpublished letters’ are quoted.
3. ātma-paricay (‘About Myself’, Visva-Bharati, 1969), pp. 7–8, a collection of autobiographical
pieces taken from various sources.

1. In 1901 Tagore was persuaded by the publisher Shrishchandra Majumdar to edit a revived
series of baṅgadarśan. Bankim’s journal had come to an end in 1883. The revived series ran for
thirteen years; Tagore was editor till 1906.

1. chinnapatrābalī, Letter No. 57, 21 June 1892.

1. Ibid., Letter No. 96, 11 May 1893.

1. Ibid., Letter No. 26, 4 July 1891.
2. See galpaguccha, Vol. IV, granthaparicay, p. 321. C. F. Andrews’ translation of samāpti can be
found in The Runaway and Other Stories (1958).
3. See rabīndrajībanī, Vol. I (Calcutta, rev. edn 1946), pp. 318–19.

1. The English word is used.
2. chinnapatrābalī, Letter No. 23, 23 June 1891.
3. Ibid., Letter No. 142, 10 August 1894.

1. Op. cit., p. 17.
2. My Reminiscences (London, 1917), p. 238.

1. Mary Lago, Rabindranath Tagore (Boston, 1976), Ch. 3.

1. For a characteristically extreme account of Tagore’s journey from rejection by his countrymen
to worship by them as ‘a fetish… the holy mascot of Bengali provincial vanity’, see Nirad C.
Chaudhuri, Thy Hand Great Anarch! India 1921–1952 (London, 1987), Bk. VII, Ch. 5.
2. sāmayikpatre rabīndraprasanga: sāhitya, ed. Nandarani Chaudhuri (Calcutta, 1970), p. 16. The
review appeared in the Phālgun (Feburary–March) issue of sāhitya in 1894.

1. galpaguccha, Vol. IV, granthaparicay, p. 307.
2. For the history of the Bengali short story, see Sisir Kumar Das, bāṃlā choṭagalpa (Calcutta,
1963).

1. See Pratap Narayan Bisvas, rabīndranāther rahasya galpa o anyānya prabandha (Calcutta, 1984).

1. denāpāonā in Bengali, meaning ‘debit and credit’ or ‘investment and return’, but also a deal,
claim, transaction etc.
2. ‘Peerless one’.

1. banamālī means ‘woodland gardener’ or ‘wearing a garland of wild flowers’, and is a name for
Krishna.

1. dayāmaya, lit., ‘full of kindness’, a name for God.

1. Kīrti, ‘feat’, ‘accomplishment’, but also used to mean fame or renown.

1. Laws of Manu V.56. Manu’s caveat actually relates to ‘eating, liquor-drinking and sexual
intercourse’. See Manu in the Glossary.

1. See Glossary, p. 309.

1. ‘Destroyer of sacrifice’ as opposed to ‘lord of sacrifice’ (Yajnanath).

1. ‘Golden deer’ (svarṇamṛg) in Bengali, which has come to be the equivalent of ‘fool’s gold’
because of the famous episode in the Rāmāyaṇa when Ravana’s minister Maricha takes the form
of a golden deer to entice Rama away from his forest hermitage, so that Ravana can abduct Sita.

1. Lit. ‘In my mind I said “sister-in-law”.’ See śyālikā in the Glossary.

1. abhimān: there is no single English word for this emotion. It includes hurt pride, bruised
feelings, and rejection by someone we love. Chandara is abhimān incarnate.

1. ‘maraṇ!’ Lit. ‘death!’ – a common ironic expression particularly among village-women. The
complex implications here include Chandara’s rejection of the husband she still loves, the
abhimān that prevents her from backing down, and a shy reluctance to display her true marital
feelings in public.

1. The English word is used.

1. See Ishvarchandra Vidyasagar in the Glossary.

1. The first line of a popular poem by Madanmohan Tarkalankar. See Glossary.

1. Sarasvati. See Glossary.

1. See Durga in the Glossary.

1 A pun on pati, which means both ‘husband’ and ‘master’.

1. There is a pun here on dvija, which can mean either a Brahmin or a bird, because both are
‘twice-born’: a Brahmin through the sacred-thread ceremony in adolescence, a bird when it
hatches from an egg.

1. i.e., ‘Didi’ and ‘Didimā’. See Glossary.

1. In English.
2. abhimān: see p. 131, n. 1.

1. mānbhañjan (the title of the story). See Krishna in the Glossary.

1. Traditionally gentlemen in Bengal wear the dhoti long, reaching to their ankles. To ‘wear it
short’ is a metaphor for miserliness or ill-breeding.

1. Fish is eaten much less in North India than in Bengal.

1. There is a traditional belief in India that deer are musical. In Rajput paintings, deer are shown
dumbstruck before a musician.

1. A title rather than a name, often given to Brahmin widows.

1. āmsattva; a great delicacy, made by drying mango-juice in the sun.

1. subal means ‘strong’ and suśīl means ‘gracious’, ‘polite’.

1. Icchāṭhākrun: a made-up deity, not a traditional Hindu goddess.

1. Progressive-minded products of English education in nineteenth-century Calcutta were known
collectively as ‘Young Bengal’.

1. The Indian Mutiny of 1857 was sparked off by the use of animal fat in cartridges which had to
be ‘bitten off’ before use. Hindus suspected cow-fat; Muslims suspected pig-fat (taboo in each
case).

1. See Glossary.

1. There is a large area of overlap between Hindi and Urdu. Hindi uses the devanāgari script and
draws from Sanskrit for its higher vocabulary. Urdu uses the Persian script and a more PersoArabic vocabulary. In British India ‘Hindusthani’ was the name given to the colloquial language
common to Hindi and Urdu; but the Princess’s Hindusthani is clearly a highly refined hybrid, i.e.
Urdu.

1. The moment of śubhadṛṣṭi in Hindu weddings, when the bride is unveiled for the first time in
front of her husband.

1. This is the yajña of the story’s title putrayajña, a rite (sacrifice) performed in order to acquire a
son.

1. ‘Clear water.’

1. Nārāyaṇa, a name for Vishnu as Protector, ironically doubling here as an epithet for the police.

1. See p. 229, n. 1.

1. Brother-in-law; sister’s husband. Because of the sisterly relationship between the two women,
Hemangini’s husband will be a brother-in-law rather than a brother (Dādā) to Kusum.

1. Welcoming Hemangini, the new bride, into the house.

1. Mallār and Deś rāgas. See Glossary.

1. bideśī: ‘foreign’, but almost certainly English.

1. Tagore’s niece. See Introduction, p. 8, and Family Tree, p. 324.
2. The English word is used.

1. The party consisted of Mrinalini Devi and a maid (‘the ladies’), Bela and Rathindranath (‘the
children’, only three and one year old at the time), and Balendranath Tagore. See Family Tree, p.
324. Gofur was the cook, and Prasanna a crewman on the boat.

1. A quotation from Tagore’s own play rājā o rānī (1889), Act II, Scene 2.
2. See Introduction, p. 8.
3. A parody of lines in Act I, Scene 2 of rājā o rānī.

1. i.e., Rathindranath Tagore. See Family Tree, p. 324.

1. Tagore did not keep a regular diary. He was working on the second volume of his yurop-yātrir
ḍāyāri (‘Diary of a Journey to Europe’, 1893) at the time.

1. Pramatha Chaudhuri (1868–1946) was a distinguished editor and essayist, and was married to
Indira Devi. See Introduction, pp. 2, 8.

1. Probably Shaileshchandra Majumdar, whose ‘Majumdar Agency’ published the first collected
edition of Tagore’s short stories. See Bibliographical Notes, p. 295. He was the younger brother
of Shrishchandra Majumdar (see p. 18, n. 1).

1. Tagore omitted this sentence when he printed the letter in chinnapatra, perhaps because he felt
that the thought-connection was not clear. He may have wished to imply that the great
Rammohan Roy (1772–1833) showed how it was possible to be Indian to the full, yet was as
much an activist as any European.

1. Loken Palit (1865–1915) was a close friend. Tagore met him on his first visit to England
(1878–9). His father, Taraknath Palit, who qualified as a barrister in 1871, was a friend of
Satyendranath Tagore. In 1879 Taraknath brought Loken to England to enter London University
and study for the Indian Civil Service. In 1900 Tagore dedicated his book of poems kṣaṇikā to
him.
2. Celebrated Sanskrit prose romance, written by Bana, poet in the court of the seventh-century
Gupta emperor Harsha.

1. Probably the essay meyeli chaṛā (‘Women’s rhymes’) published in sādhanā in September–
November 1894, and later in lok-sāhitya (‘Folk-literature’, 1907). For an extract from an essay on
chaṛā see Appendix B of Selected Poems.

1. Town in north Bengal, in the Rajshahi District of present-day Bangladesh.
2. Perhaps because of the build-up of sandbanks.

1. Affectionate abbreviation for Choṭobau. See Glossary.

1. A quotation from the śānti parva of the Mahābhārata (12.168.30).
2. Pramatha Chaudhuri and Surendranath Tagore; the Gujarati friend has not been identified.
The first Gujarati translation of Tagore did not appear till 1918, so it is hard to say if this friend
had a specific interest in his writing.
3. Jagadish Chandra Bose (1859–1937) was a distinguished scientist, whose experiments on
plant-reactions greatly interested Tagore. In August 1900 Bose represented India in an
International Congress of Physicists in Paris. His theories about connections between organic and
inorganic matter met with scepticism, and Tagore is responding here to a letter in which Bose
described his determination to fight for his views. Tagore’s ironic predictions of the praise that
would come to Bose from his countrymen if he won acclaim abroad is prophetic of his own
experience after winning the Nobel Prize.

1. Frederick Sleigh Roberts, Earl (1832–1914). Field marshal who distinguished himself during
the Indian Mutiny and the Second Afghan War; became commander-in-chief in India in 1885;
and commanded the British forces during the South African War. He occupied Pretoria on 5 June
1900.
2. This is often quoted as the earliest indication of Tagore’s interest in painting. But according to
an article in Desh (5 August 1989), he experimented with portrait-sketching as early as 1880.
There are also rough doodles in his earliest manuscript of all, mālati pũthi, parts of which may go
back to 1874.

1. Loken’s translation was published in bhāratī, April–May 1901.
2. Sarala (her full name was Saralata) was the wife of Satishranjan Das, J. C. Bose’s brother-inlaw. Tagore’s use of the term āryā (‘Revered Lady’) may derive from a request that Bose made to
him in a letter of April 1899 that he should think of a Bengali alternative for ‘Mrs’. In an article
on ‘Names’ written in 1931, Tagore recalled this, saying that āryā was better than debī (devi), but
had never caught on.
3. Shibadhan Bidyarnab, a Sanskrit pundit who also gave Tagore’s son Rathindranath his first
Sanskrit lessons at Shelidah.

1. The Tagore family owned some pieces of land in Orissa (see Introduction, p. 9), but the plot
mentioned here was bought by Rabindranath in March 1898. He wanted to give it to Bose, but
eventually had to sell it to pay off debts incurred by his Santiniketan school.

1. Nitendranath, third son of Dwijendranath Tagore.
2. The ‘Majumdar Agency’ edition. See Bibliographical Notes, p. 295.
3. prabeśinī (1900), not included in the present volume.
4. Miriam S. Knight, translator of Bankim’s novels The Poison Tree and Krishna Kanta’s Will. In
fact Sister Nivedita was the first person to translate a Tagore story. See p. 298, n. 1.
5. Radhakishore Manikya, Maharajah of Tripura, was a close friend of the Tagore family. Tagore
had approached him for help with the cost of Bose’s stay and research in England. bisarjan
(‘Sacrifice’) was staged in honour of the Maharajah in Calcutta on 16 December 1900.
6. See Glossary.

1. There are small gaps in the manuscript here. Kalidasa’s Meghadūta (‘Cloud-messenger’) was a
text that Tagore constantly returned to. The essay here is nababarṣā (‘New Rain’), published in
baṅgadarśan in July–August 1901 and included in bicitra prabandha (1907). Compare ‘The
Meghadūta’, ‘New Rain’ and Appendix A in Selected Poems, and Appendix A in the present
volume.

1. For Edward Thompson’s role in the translation of Tagore’s stories see E. P. Thompson, Alien
Homage: Edward Thompson and Rabindranath Tagore (OUP, New Delhi, 1993), pp. 17–25.

1. This was almost certainly the first translation of a Tagore story, earlier than the version in New
India. In a letter from Sister Nivedita (the famous Irish-born disciple of Swami Vivekananda) to
Mrs Ole Bull, 29 November 1900, we read that she had already ‘Englished’ Kabuliwallah by then.
Jagadish Chandra Bose, who had helped her with the translation, made an unsuccessful attempt
to have it published in Harper’s magazine in that same year.


