The zamindars of Nayanjor were at one time regarded as true gentlemen
– ‘Babus’ – a title that in those days was not at all easy to achieve.
Today, no one can be called ‘Raja’ or ‘Raybahadur’ without the ritual of
dances, dinners, horse-races, flattery and connections; likewise in those
days great efforts were needed to win from the public the name of
‘Babu’.

The ‘Babus’ of Nayanjor used to tear off the borders of their Dhaka
muslins before they wore them, because the borders were too coarse for
their aristocratic skins; they spent lakhs of rupees on marrying their pet
kittens; and on one particular festive occasion they were said to have
turned night into day not only by the number of lights but by showering
real silver tinsel to simulate the sun’s rays. Such grandeur could
obviously not be handed down intact to their heirs. Like oil in a 
multiwicked lamp, it was soon burnt away.

Our friend Kailaschandra Raychaudhuri was a burnt-out scion of the
famous Nayanjor Babus. At his birth, the lamp was nearly out of oil;
with his father’s death, it spluttered in a final show of funereal excess
and then went out completely. Assets were sold to pay off debts; the
remainder was far too little to keep up the name of the family. So Kailas
Babu left Nayanjor and came with his son to Calcutta; but before long
his son too abandoned a faded existence in this world for the world
beyond, leaving an only daughter.

We were neighbours of Kailas Babu. Our own history was entirely
different. My father had earned his wealth through his own efforts,
counting every paisa, economizing even in the length of his dhoti,1 and
never aspiring to be a ‘Babu’. As his only son, I was grateful to him. I
was proud to have acquired some education, to have enough means to
hold my head high without too much effort. It’s better to inherit
Company Bonds in a small iron box than an empty store of ancestral
glories.

Probably this is why I was so irritated when Kailas Babu tried to draw
hefty cheques on the failed bank of his ancestry! I felt that he somehow
despised my father for earning his own money. It made me furious –
who was he to despise us? A man who had sacrificed a lot, resisted many
temptations, had no desire to be famous; who had through effort and
care, intelligence and skill beaten all obstacles, seizing every chance to
make his pile, building it with his own hands: he was not to be despised
because he didn’t wear his dhoti below his knees!

I was young then, this was why I reacted like this, fumed like this.
Now I’m older, and it doesn’t bother me any more. I’m well off; I lack for
nothing. If a man who has nothing gets pleasure from sneering, it doesn’t
cost me a penny, and maybe the poor fellow gets some consolation from
it.

It was striking that no one found Kailas Babu irritating except me, for
he had a rare sort of innocence. He involved himself totally in the
feelings and activities of his neighbours. He had smiles for them all, from
the youngest to the eldest; he took pleasure in inquiring kindly about
everyone, whoever they were and wherever they were. At every
encounter he would launch into a stream of questions: ‘How are you?
How is Shashi? Is your father well? I hear that Madhu’s boy has fever –
is he better now? I haven’t seen Haricharan Babu for a long time now –
has he been ill? How about Rakhal? Is everyone at home well?’ – and so
on.

He was always beautifully dressed. He didn’t own many clothes, but
he daily aired them in the sun: his waistcoat, chadar and shirt – together
with his pillowcase, mat and ancient bedspread – were brushed and
hung on a line, then folded and placed neatly on the ālnā. He seemed
when one saw him to be always out in his Sunday best. His room,
though poorly furnished, was spotless; he appeared to be better off than
he was. For lack of servants, he would shut the door of his room and
neatly crimp his dhoti himself, and carefully press his chadar and 
shirtsleeves. He had lost his family’s huge estates, but had managed to keep
from the jaws of poverty a valuable rose-water spray, a pomatum-pot, a
gold saucer, a silver hookah, an expensive shawl, an old-fashioned pair
of pyjamas, and a turban. If occasion arose, he would get these out and
revive the glory and world-wide fame of the Babus of Nayanjor.

Gentle and natural though he was, he could sometimes be conceited –
but only out of loyalty to his ancestors. People indulged this: they found
it rather charming. They called him ‘ hākurdā’ – Grandfather – and
constantly gathered at his house. But lest the cost of tobacco became too
much for his slender means, someone would bring some along and say, ‘
hākurdā, have a taste of this – it’s beautiful.’ hākurdā would take a
few puffs and say, ‘Not bad, not bad at all’, then speak of tobacco that
cost 60 or 65 rupees an ounce: would anyone like to try it? But to say
‘yes’ would mean a hunt for the key, or the assertion that his old servant
Ganesh, that rascal, must have put the tobacco heaven knows where – a
charge that Ganesh accepted serenely – till everyone chorused, ‘Don’t
worry, hākurdā, it wouldn’t have agreed with us: this tobacco will be
fine.’

hākurdā smiled at this, and didn’t repeat his offer. When people got
up to leave, he would say, ‘Well then, when are you coming to have a
bite with me?’ ‘We can fix that another time,’ they would answer. ‘Fine,’
said hākurdā, ‘let it rain a bit, and get a bit cooler. We can’t have a
proper blow-out in this heat.’ When the rain came, no one reminded him
of his promise; and if ever the subject came up, everyone said, ‘Better
wait till the rains are over.’

His friends would agree that it did not befit him to live in such a small
place, that it must be very trying for him; but it was so difficult to find a
decent place in Calcutta! It could take five or six years to find a goodsized 
rented house. ‘Never mind that, my friends,’ said hākurdā, ‘it’s a
pleasure to live so near you. I have a big house at Nayanjor, but I don’t
feel at home there.’ I’m sure that hākurdā knew that everyone
understood his true position; and when he pretended that the defunct
estate at Nayanjor still existed, and everyone played along with this, he
knew in his heart that this mutual deception was just an expression of
friendship.

But I found it disgusting! When one is young one wants to stamp on
vanity, however harmless, and foolishness is less forgivable than many
more serious sins. Kailas Babu was not exactly stupid; everyone sought
his help and advice; but concerning the glories of Nayanjor, he had no
sense at all. People loved him too much to object to the nonsense he
spoke, so he gave it free rein; and if anyone sang the praises of Nayanjor,
he happily swallowed the lot, never suspecting for a moment that others
might doubt it.

Often I wished I could openly knock down, with a couple of cannonshots, 
the old and false fortress in which he lived, which he thought to
be permanent. If a hunter sees a bird conveniently perched on a nearby
branch, he wants to shoot it; if a boy sees a hanging boulder on a
mountainside, he wants to send it rolling down with a kick. To give a
final push to a thing which is just on the point of falling, but which still
hangs on, is a satisfying act and brings applause from spectators. Kailas
Babu’s lies were so simple-minded, so slenderly based; they danced so
wantonly before the guns of Truth, that I longed to destroy them in a
trice: only my laziness and deference to convention held me back.

II
In so far as I can analyse my past state of mind, I think there was
another deep-seated reason for my malice towards Kailas Babu. This
needs some explanation.

Although I was a rich man’s son, I passed my MA on time; and despite
my youth, I did not indulge in low pleasures or company. Even after my
parents’ death, I was not corrupted by becoming master of the family. As
regards my appearance, to say I was handsome would be conceited, but
it would not be untrue. So my value in the marriage-market of Bengal
was certainly high, and I was determined to capitalize on it fully. A
beautiful, educated, only daughter of a rich man was what I wanted.

Proposals came from far and wide, offering dowries of 10,000 or
20,000 rupees. I weighed them up carefully and objectively, but none of
them seemed quite right. I found myself agreeing with Bhababhuti:

Who knows if my equal can be born?
The world is wide and life is long –

but I wondered if so rare an article would ever be found within Bengal’s
modest confines.

Parents fulsomely sang my praises, and offered me various pūjās; and
this (whether I liked their daughters or not) was quite congenial to me.
A decent fellow like me deserved their pūjās! In the Shastras one reads
that whether the gods grant favours or not, they are angry if they don’t
receive their proper pūjās: regular offerings to me gave me equally high
ideas.

I have mentioned that hākurdā had an only granddaughter. I had
often seen her, but had never considered her beautiful. I had therefore
no thought of marrying her. I expected, though, that Kailas Babu –
personally or through some intermediary – would have made an offering
to me, with his granddaughter’s marriage in mind, simply because I was
a good catch. But he didn’t do that. I heard that he had said to some
friend that the Babus of Nayanjor never on any account made the first
move: even if it meant that his granddaughter remained unmarried, he
would never break this rule. I was very offended by this, and my anger
lasted for a long time. It was only my good breeding that made me keep
quiet about it.

My nature was such, however, that in my anger there was a spark of
humour, like lightning linked to thunder. I could not do outright injury
to the old man, but I was tempted by an amusing plan. I described
earlier how people used to come out with all sorts of fibs in order to
please him. A retired Deputy Magistrate living nearby often said,
‘Ṭhākurdā, whenever I met the Lieutenant-Governor he always asked
about the Babus of Nayanjor – he said that the Rajas of Burdwan and the
Babus of Nayanjor were the only really noble families in Bengal.’
Ṭhākurdā was very chuffed at this, and if he met the retired Deputy
Magistrate would ask amidst other pleasantries, ‘How is the 
LieutenantGovernor? And the memsāheb? And are all their children well?’ He
intended to visit the Lieutenant-Governor one day soon. But the Deputy
Magistrate knew that many Lieutenant-Governors and GovernorGenerals would 
come and go before the famous four-horse coach of Nayanjor would be ready 
for the visit.

One morning I went to Kailas Babu and, taking him aside, said
confidentially, ‘Ṭhākurdā, yesterday I was at the Lieutenant-Governor’s
levee. He started talking about the Babus of Nayanjor, and I told him
that Kailas Babu of Nayanjor was living in Calcutta. He was very sorry
that he had not been to see you all this time, and said that he would visit
you privately today at noon.’

Anyone else would have seen the absurdity of this, and even Kailas
Babu himself would have laughed if he had heard it told about anyone
else; but applied to himself he did not doubt the news in the slightest.
He was both delighted and flustered: where would he seat the
Lieutenant-Governor? What should he do for him? How should he
welcome him? How should he keep up the honour of Nayanjor? He had
no idea! On top of that he did not know English, so conversation would
be a problem.

‘Don’t worry about that,’ I said. ‘He’ll have an interpreter with him.
But the Lieutenant-Governor is particularly keen that no one else should
be present.’

In the afternoon, when most inhabitants of the area were at their
offices, or snoozing at home indoors, a carriage and pair drew up outside
Kailas Babu’s residence. Liveried footmen announced, ‘His Excellency the
Lieutenant-Governor.’ Ṭhākurdā was ready, dressed in old-fashioned
white pyjamas and turban; the old servant Ganesh was dressed in his
master’s dhoti, chadar and shirt. As soon as he heard the announcement,
Ganesh ran panting and trembling to the door, and, bowing low in
repeated salaams, showed into the room a close friend and
contemporary of mine, dressed in English clothes.

Spreading his one valuable shawl on to a stool, and seating the bogus
Lieutenant-Governor there, Kailas Babu delivered a long and excessively
humble speech in Urdu. He then presented, on a gold plate, one of his
carefully preserved heirlooms: a string of Moghul gold coins. Ganesh
meanwhile stood at the ready with the rose-water sprinkler and
pomatum-pot.

Kailas Babu repeatedly expressed regret that His Excellency had not
visited him in his home at Nayanjor, where he would have been able to
offer him proper hospitality. In Calcutta he was an exile, a fish out of
water: he couldn’t do anything properly – and so on.

My friend shook his top-hatted head gravely. He should, according to
English custom, have removed his hat indoors; but he tried to keep
himself covered as much as possible in case he was found out. No one
other than Kailas Babu and his besotted old servant would have fallen
for the young Bengali’s disguise for a moment.

After ten minutes my friend bowed and made his exit. Footmen, 
wellrehearsed, took into the impostor’s carriage the string of coins on the
gold plate, and the shawl from the stool; then, from Ganesh’s hands, the
rose-water sprinkler and pomatum-pot. Kailas Babu assumed this was the
Lieutenant-Governor’s custom. I watched all this from the next room,
and my ribs were close to cracking with suppressed laughter.

Finally, unable to bear any more, I ran into a room a bit further away:
but no sooner had I collapsed into laughter when I saw a girl slumped on
a low bed, sobbing. She stood up at once when she saw me. Choking
with tears, darting fiery glances from her large, black eyes, she snapped,
‘What has my grandfather done to you? Why have you come to trick
him? Why have you come?’ Then, unable to manage any more, she
buried her face in her sari and burst into tears again.

So much for my fit of laughter! All this time it had not entered my
head that there was anything other than humour in what I had done.
Now I saw I had hit a very tender spot; the revolting cruelty of my
action was glaringly exposed; and I slunk out of the room, ashamed and
embarrassed, like a kicked dog. What harm had the old man done me?
His innocent conceit had never harmed anyone! Why had my own
conceit been so malicious?

My eyes were opened to something else as well. For a long time I had
thought of Kusum as an item of merchandise waiting on the shelf till
some unmarried man’s notice was attracted. She was there because I
didn’t want her: let anyone who wanted have her! Now I understood
that here in this house there was a girl with a human heart inside her, a
heart whose array of feelings encompassed a land of mystery: to the east
an imponderable past, to the west an unknowable future. Did anyone
who had such a heart deserve to be picked by the size of her dowry or
the shape of her nose and eyes?

I didn’t sleep at all that night. The next morning I crept like a thief to
Ṭhākurdā’s house, carrying all the valuable things we had taken from the
old man; I intended to hand them back to the servant without saying
anything.

Flummoxed at not finding him, I heard the old man and his
granddaughter talking somewhere inside the house. The girl was asking,
with sweet affection, ‘Grandfather, what did the Lieutenant-Governor
say to you yesterday?’ hākurdā cheerfully spun a long panegyric to the
ancient house of Nayanjor, supposedly delivered by the LieutenantGovernor. 
The girl received it eagerly.

My eyes filled with tears at the tender, maternal deception played by
this young girl on her aged guardian. I sat silently for a long time; when
at last hākurdā had finished his story and gone, I went up to his
granddaughter with the things I had deceitfully stolen, placed them
before her, and left without a word.

When I saw the old man again, I did praṇām to him (previously, in
accordance with modern custom, I had not offered any salutation). He
presumably thought this sudden show of respect was prompted by the
Lieutenant-Governor’s visit. He excitedly described it to me, and I
happily fell in with his account. Others who were there listening knew
that it was all made up, but merrily accepted it.

When everyone had gone I nervously and humbly made a proposal. I
said that although my own lineage was in no way comparable to the
Babus of Nayanjor, yet…

When I had finished, the old man clasped me to his breast and said
joyfully, ‘I am poor – I never imagined I would have good fortune like
this, my friend – my Kusum must have won great merit in heaven for
you to favour us now.’ He wept as he spoke. This was the first time that
Kailas Babu forgot his duty to his noble ancestors and admitted he was
poor, admitted it would not do damage to the house of Nayanjor to
accept me. I had plotted to humiliate the old man, while he had longed
for me, heart and soul, as the worthiest possible groom for his
granddaughter.

