While my wife was alive I didn’t give much thought to Prabha. I was
more involved with her mother than with her. I was happy to watch her
play and laugh, to listen to her half-formed speech and respond to her
affection; I would, whenever I was in the mood, romp around with her;
but the moment she started to cry I would return her to her mother’s
arms and make a speedy escape. I never considered what care and effort
were needed to bring up a child.

But with the sudden and untimely death of my wife, Prabha’s
upbringing passed to me, and I clasped her warmly. I don’t quite know
whose concern was the stronger: mine to bring up my motherless
daughter with double affection, or hers to look after her wifeless father.
But from the age of six, she took charge of the house. It was plain to see
othat this little girl was trying to be her father’s sole guardian.
It tickled me to put myself entirely into her hands. I noticed that the
more useless and helpless I was, the more she liked it; if I picked up my
clothes or umbrella myself, she reacted as if I had infringed her rights.
She had never before had a doll as big as her father; she revelled all day
in feeding him, dressing him, settling him down to sleep. Only when I
took her through her arithmetic book or the first part of her poetry
reader did my paternal responsibility come slightly alive.

From time to time I remembered that to marry her to a suitable groom
would cost a lot of money – but where was I to get that money? I was
educating her as well as I could: it would be awful if she ended up in
some nincompoop’s hands.

I gave my attention to the need to earn money. I was too old to get a
job in a government office, and there was no way I could get into any
other office either. After much pondering, I started to write books.

If you punch holes in a hollow bamboo stick, it doesn’t become a
receptacle; you can’t keep oil or water in it; it can’t be put to any
practical use. But if you blow into it, it makes an excellent cost-free
flute. I had the idea that anyone who was unfortunate enough to be
useless at any practical work would certainly write good books.
Confident of this, I wrote a satirical farce. People said it was good, and it
was performed on stage.

The dangerous result of my sudden taste of fame was that I now
couldn’t stop writing farces. With knotted brow, I spent all day writing
them.

Prabha would come and ask, with a loving smile, ‘Won’t you have
your bath, Father?’

‘Leave me alone,’ I snapped. ‘Don’t bother me now.’

Probably the girl’s face darkened like a lamp suddenly blown out; but
I never even noticed her silent, pained withdrawal from the room.

I flared up at the maid, and cuffed the male servant; if a beggar came
calling for alms I would drive him away with a stick. If an innocent
passer-by spoke through my window to ask the way (my room looked on
to the street), I would tell him to go to hell. Why couldn’t people
understand that I was, at that moment, writing a hilarious farce?

But the money I earned was not at all proportionate either to the
hilarity of my farces or to my fame. Nor, at the time, was the money
uppermost in my mind. Meanwhile, in unthought-of places, grooms
suitable for Prabha were growing up who would set other fathers free
from their duty to their daughters, and I failed to notice. Probably only
starvation would have brought me to my senses; but now a new
opportunity came my way. The zamindar of Jahir village invited me to
be the salaried editor of a paper he was starting. I accepted, and within a
few days I was writing with such fervour that people used to point me
out in the street, and in my own estimation I was as blindingly brilliant
as the afternoon sun. Next to Jahir was Ahir village. The zamindars of
the two villages were bitter enemies. Previously their quarrels had led to
brawls – but now the magistrate had bound them over to keep the peace,
and the zamindar of Jahir had engaged poor me in place of his
murderous lāṭhiyāls.

Everyone told me I discharged my duties most honourably. The Ahir
villagers were utterly cowed by my pen. The whole of their history and
ancestry was blackened by it.

This was a good time for me. I became quite fat. There was a
perpetual smile on my face. I fired devastating verbal sallies at the
people of Ahir and their ancestors, and everyone in Jahir split their sides
at my wit. I was blissfully happy.

In the end, Ahir village also brought out a paper. They didn’t mince
their words. They hurled insults with such zeal and in such crude and
vulgar language that the very letters on the page seemed to shriek before
one’s eyes. The people of both villages knew exactly what was intended.
But I, as was my custom, attacked my opponents with humour, subtlety
and irony, so that neither my friends nor my enemies could understand
what I meant. The result was that though I had won the argument
everyone thought I had lost. I then felt compelled to write a sermon on
good taste – but I found that this too was a grave mistake, for whereas it
is easy to ridicule what is good, it is not so easy to ridicule what is
already ridiculous. The sons of Hanu can happily make fun of the sons of
Manu, but the sons of Manu can never be so successful at pillorying the
sons of Hanu: whose snarls, therefore, drove good taste out of town.
My employer cooled towards me. I was not welcome at public
gatherings. When I went out, no one hailed me or spoke to me. People
even began to laugh when they saw me. My farces, meanwhile, were
completely forgotten. I felt like a spent match; I had flamed for a minute,
and then burned out. I was so disheartened that however hard I
scratched my head, not a line of writing would come. I began to feel
there was no point in living any more.

Prabha was now scared of me. She did not dare approach unless she
was invited. She had come to see that a clay doll was a much better
companion than a father who wrote satires.

One day it became apparent that the Ahir paper had started to
concentrate on me rather than on the zamindar. Vile things were
written. My friends each brought me the paper and read it out with great
amusement. Some of them said that whatever the content, the language
was superb: by which they meant that the slanders it contained were
easy to understand. I heard this same opinion throughout the day.

There was a small plot of garden in front of my house. One evening I
was pacing there alone, utterly sick at heart. As the birds returned to
their nests and stopped their singing, freely consigning themselves to the
peace of the evening, I was taken with the thought that there are no
satirists’ cliques among birds, no arguments about good taste. But I was
still preoccupied with how I could best reply to my slanderers. One of
the drawbacks of refinement is that not every sort of person understands
it. Boorish language is relatively commonplace, so I decided I would
write a reply in appropriately boorish style. I would not give in! At that
moment I heard a small, familiar voice in the darkness of the evening,
and next I felt a tender, hot hand touch mine. I was so worried and
distracted that even though the voice and touch were known to me, they
did not sink in. But a moment later the voice was gently sounding in my
ears, and the delicate touch was intensifying. A little girl was beside me,
and was softly calling, ‘Father.’ When she got no answer she lifted my
right hand and pressed it lightly against her cheek; then she slowly went
indoors.

Prabha had not called me like this for a long time – had not, of her
own accord, come and showed that sort of affection. So her tender touch
this evening went straight to my heart.

A little later I returned to the house and saw Prabha lying on the bed.
She looked worn out, and her eyes were slightly closed; she lay like a
flower, shed at the end of the day. I felt her brow: it was very warm; her
breath was hot too; the veins in her temple were throbbing. I realized
now that the girl, distressed by the onset of illness, had gone to her
father longing with all her heart for his care and affection; and her
father had at the time been engrossed in thinking up a scorching reply
for the Jahir paper to print.

I sat down next to her. Saying nothing, she pulled my hand into the
feverishly warm palms of her hands and, placing her cheek on it, lay
quietly.

I made a bonfire of all the Jahir and Ahir papers. I never wrote my
riposte. And giving up like that gave me greater happiness than I had
ever known.

When her mother died, I held Prabha in my lap. Now, after cremating
her stepmother – my writing – I lifted her into my arms again and
carried her indoors.

