I have heard that these days many Bengali girls have to find their
husbands through their own efforts. I have also had to find mine, but
God has helped me. Maybe this is because of my many vows and pūjās to
Shiva, from an early age. I was not yet eight years old when I was
married. But my sins in an earlier life stopped me from acquiring my
husband fully. Three-eyed Mother Durga took away my two eyes. For the
whole of the rest of my life she denied me the pleasure of seeing my
husband.

My baptism of fire began in childhood. Before I was fourteen years old
I gave birth to a dead baby, and I myself came close to death. But if a
person is fated to suffer sorrow, she is not allowed to die too soon. A
lamp that is meant to burn long has to have enough oil: it mustn’t go out
until night is over. I survived my illness, true, but whether through
physical weakness, or mental distress, or for whatever reason, my eyes
were affected.

My husband was at that time studying to be a doctor. With all the
enthusiasm of a student, he leapt at a chance to try out his medical
knowledge. He began to treat my eyes himself. My elder brother was at
college that year, studying for his BL. He came to my husband one day
and said, ‘What are you doing? You’ll destroy Kusum’s eyes. Let a really
good doctor examine her.’

‘If a good doctor came,’ said my husband, ‘what new treatment could
he give? I know about all the available medicines.’

My brother grew angry and said, ‘So I suppose there is no difference
between you and the top man at your college?’

‘You are studying law,’ said my husband. ‘What do you know of
medicine? When you get married, and have to go to law, say, over your
wife’s property, will you come to me for advice?’

‘When kings fight,’ I said to myself, ‘ordinary folk had best keep out of
the way. My husband is quarrelling with Dādā, but I’m the one who will
pay for it.’ I also felt that since I’d been given away in marriage, my
brother and his friends no longer had a right to intervene. My sorrow
and happiness, health and sickness were all in the hands of my husband.

Relations between my husband and brother became rather strained
over this small matter of medical treatment. My flow of tears, already
copious, now became even heavier – with neither my husband nor my
brother understanding the true reason.

One afternoon when my husband was at college my brother suddenly
appeared with a doctor. The doctor examined me and said that if care
were not taken my eye-condition might get worse. He prescribed a new
set of medicines, which my brother immediately sent someone to fetch.
When the doctor had gone I said, ‘Dādā, I beg you, don’t interfere with
the treatment I am following at the moment.’

I had been in awe of my brother ever since childhood: to speak to him
so bluntly was an odd thing for me to do. But I knew well that no good
would come of the treatment that my brother had arranged behind my
husband’s back. My brother, too, was probably surprised at my boldness.
He was silent for a while, then said, ‘All right, I shan’t bring a doctor
again, but please try the medicines that are on their way.’ When the
medicines arrived, my brother explained how I should use them, and
then left. Before my husband returned from college, I took the bottles,
pill-box, brush and instructions and carefully disposed of them in the
well in the courtyard of our house.

As if out of grudge towards my brother, my husband now treated my
eyes with redoubled vigour. He changed medicines from one day to the
next. I wore blinkers over my eyes, or spectacles; I put drops into them,
or smeared them with powder; I even put up with the foul-smelling fishoil 
he gave me to swallow and which made me want to vomit. My
husband would ask me how I was feeling and I would say, ‘Much better.’
I even tried to persuade myself that my tears were a good sign; when the
streaming stopped I decided I was on the road to recovery. But before
long the pain was unendurable. My vision was blurred, and I was
writhing with headache. I could see that even my husband was
downcast. He was finding it difficult to think of a pretext for calling a
doctor after so long.

‘To set my brother’s mind at rest,’ I said, ‘what harm would there be
in calling a doctor? He’s becoming so unreasonably angry – it’s upsetting
me. You can carry on treating me, but a doctor can be brought in too,
for form’s sake.’

‘That’s a good idea,’ said my husband. That very day he returned with
an English doctor. I don’t know what exactly was said, but it seemed
that the sāheb gave my husband quite a scolding – for he stood silently,
hanging his head. When the doctor had gone, I took my husband’s hand
and said, ‘Why did you bring that conceited white-skinned ass? A native
doctor would have done. Why should that man understand my eyecondition 
better than you?’

‘It has become necessary to operate on your eyes,’ said my husband
nervously.

I made a show of anger and said, ‘If an operation is necessary, why
did you not tell me so at the beginning? Did you think I was scared?’

My husband became more confident again, and said, ‘How many men
are so heroic that they wouldn’t be scared at the prospect of having their
eyes cut open?’

‘Maybe they’re only heroic to their wives,’ I said jokingly.

‘You’re right,’ said my husband, turning suddenly pale and solemn.
‘Men are essentially driven by vanity.’

I dismissed his solemnity by saying, ‘Do you want to match us in
vanity too? We have the edge over you even in that.’

Meanwhile my brother had come, and I called him aside to say, ‘Dādā,
by following all this time what the doctor of yours prescribed, my eyes
have been getting much better, but by mistake the other day I smeared
on to my eyes the medicine which I should have swallowed, and they’ve
started to go fuzzy again. My husband says I shall have to have an
operation.’

‘I thought you were following your husband’s treatment,’ said my
brother. ‘I was annoyed, that’s why I haven’t been to see you.’

‘No,’ I said, ‘I’ve secretly been following that doctor’s prescription. I
didn’t tell my husband, in case he got angry.’

What lies women have to tell! I couldn’t upset my brother, and I
couldn’t damage my husband’s self-esteem either. A mother has to
beguile her child; a wife has to keep her husband happy – women have
to stoop to so many deceptions! But the result of my ploy was that
before I finally became blind I was able to see a reconciliation between
my husband and brother. My brother supposed that the damage was
done by the treatment he arranged secretly; my husband felt that it
would have been better to have listened to my brother’s advice from the
beginning. They both felt guilty, and thus longed for forgiveness and
drew very close to each other. My husband came to my brother for
guidance, and my brother sought my husband’s opinion on all matters.

At last they mutually agreed to call an English doctor to come and
operate on my left eye. In its weakened state, it failed to withstand the
shock of surgery, and its dim remaining light went out. After that the
other eye also little by little faded into darkness. A curtain was drawn
forever over the sandal-decorated youthful image I had first seen in
childhood, standing in front of me at the moment of the śubhadṛṣṭi.

One day my husband came to my bedside and said, ‘I shall not try to
bamboozle you any more. It was I who destroyed your eyes.’

I could tell from his voice that he was close to tears. I pressed his right
hand with both my hands and said, ‘Don’t worry, you took what
belonged to you. Suppose my eyes had been destroyed by some other
doctor’s treatment – what comfort would there have been in that? If it
was inevitable that no one could save my eyes, the one consolation of
my blindness is that my eyes were taken by you. When he had
insufficient flowers for a pūjā Rama tore out his own eyes and offered
them to God. I too have given my eyes to a god – I have given to you my
light of the full moon, my morning sunshine, my blue of the sky, my
green of the earth. Describe to me anything you see that pleases you. I
shall receive from you the grace of your gift of sight.’

I was not able to say all this – I could not find the words for it; but I
had felt these things for a long time. Sometimes when weariness
overcame me, when my faith started to ebb, when I started to regard
myself as deprived or tragic or unfortunate, then I would speak to myself
in these terms: I would try to lift myself out of my depression by relying
on this solace, this devotion. That day, partly by what I said, partly by
what I was not able to say, I think I conveyed my feelings to him. He
said in turn, ‘Kumu, I can never give you back what I destroyed through
my stupidity, but as far as I am able I shall make up for your loss of sight
by staying by you.’

‘There is no point in that,’ I said. ‘I shall never allow you to make your
home a hospital for the blind. You must marry again.’

I was just about to explain in detail why it was so necessary for him to
marry again, when I choked slightly. Before I could recover my breath,
my husband blurted out: ‘I may be stupid, I may be arrogant, but that is
not to say that I am wicked too! I made you blind with my own hands; if
I compound my error by deserting you and taking another wife, then I
vow, by my iṣṭa-devatā Krishna, to count it a sin as wicked as patricide or
the killing of Brahmins!’

I would not have let him make so terrible a vow – I would have
stopped him; but tears were swelling my breast, throttling my throat,
straining my eyes, preparing to stream down in torrents: I could not
restrain them enough to allow myself to speak. As I listened to what he
said, I buried my face in the pillow and wept tears of intense joy. I was
blind, but he would not leave me! He would clutch me to his heart as a
grieving man clings to his grief! I did not expect such blessings, but my
mind, in its selfishness, revelled in them.

When my first shower of tears was over, I drew his face close to my
breast and said, ‘Why did you make such a dreadful vow? I did not tell
you to marry again for your own happiness. It would be in my interest to
have a co-wife. I could hand over to her work for you that my blindness
makes impossible for me.’

‘Housework can be done by servants,’ said my husband. ‘How can I
marry a servant out of convenience and place her on the same seat as
you, who are a goddess to me?’ He lifted my face and placed a single,
pure kiss on my forehead; that kiss seemed to open a third eye on my
brow, to invest me with instant divinity. ‘Fine,’ I said to myself. ‘Now
that I am blind I cannot be a housewife any more in the outer, physical
world, but instead – rising above that world – I can be a goddess
working for my husband’s good! No more lies, no more deceptions – I’m
through with the meanness and deviousness that are the housewife’s lot.’

Yet for the whole of that day there was a conflict within me. I rejoiced
in the deep-seated knowledge that my husband’s awesome vow would
prevent him from marrying again. Nothing could dislodge that joy. But
the goddess I had found in myself that day said, ‘Perhaps a time will
come when remarriage will do your husband more good than adherence
to the vow.’ To which the woman in me answered, ‘That may be so, but
having made such a vow, no way can he marry again.’ The goddess then
said, ‘Maybe – but there’s no reason for you to be happy at that.’ To
which the woman answered, ‘I understand what you are saying, but he
did, after all, make the vow.’ And so forth. The debate went on and on.
The goddess then lapsed into silent disapproval, and my whole inner self
was engulfed by a terrifying darkness.

My conscience-stricken husband put a ban on all servants, and was
ready to run errands for me himself. At first I enjoyed my helpless
dependence on him in every trivial matter, because in this way I kept
him always near me. Because I couldn’t see him with my eyes, my desire
to keep him close grew overwhelming. That part of my pleasure in him
that had belonged to my eyes was now shared out between my other
senses – who fought to increase their share. Now, if ever my husband
worked away from the house for long, I would feel lost, bereft, with
nothing to hold on to. Previously when my husband went to college, if
he was late coming back, I would open the window a bit and watch the
road. I would let my eyes, as it were, bind to myself the world in which
he moved. Now my whole sightless body tried to reach out to him. My
main bridge between my world and his had collapsed. There was now an
impassable darkness between him and me: I could only sit helplessly and
anxiously, waiting for him to come from his shore to mine. Therefore,
whenever he had to leave me for even a moment, my whole blind body
longed to cling to him, desperately called out to him.

But such yearning and dependence is not healthy. A wife is burden
enough on her husband, without adding the great weight of blindness as
well. My all-consuming darkness was for me alone to bear. I fervently
promised I would not use my blindness to bind my husband to me.

Within a short time I had learnt to carry out my customary tasks
through sound and smell and touch. I even managed much of the
housework with greater skill than formerly. I came to think that vision
distracts as much as it helps us in our work. The eyes see far more than
is necessary to do a job well. And when the eyes act as watchmen, then
the ears become lazy; they hear much less than they should. Now, in the
absence of those vigilant eyes, my other senses did their duty calmly and
fully. I stopped allowing my husband to do my work, and restored to
myself all the work I had done for him before.

‘You’re depriving me of my chance to make amends,’ my husband
said.

‘I don’t know about your making amends,’ I said, ‘but why should I
add to my failings?’ Whatever he might say, it was a great relief to him
when I set him free. No man should have to make a lifelong vow of
servitude to a blind wife.

My husband qualified as a doctor and took me off to a country district.
To come to a village was like returning to my mother. I was eight years
old when I left my village and came to the city. In the next ten years, my
birthplace became as vague as a shadow in my mind. For as along as my
sight lasted, Calcutta crowded out my memories. When I lost my sight, I
realized that Calcutta had merely tricked my eyes; it could not fill my
heart. As soon as I lost my sight, the village of my childhood grew as
bright in my mind as a starry evening sky.

Towards the end of Agrahāyan we went to Hasimpur. It was a new
place for me – I did not know what it looked like; but it hugged me with
the scents and sensations of my childhood. The dawn breeze from the
newly ploughed, dew-soaked fields; the sweet pervasive scent of golden
fields of mustard and pigeon-pea; the songs of the cowherds; even the
clatter of bullock-cart wheels on broken roads; all thrilled me. The
buried memories of my early life seemed to come alive, to surround me
again with their inexpressible sounds and scents; my blind eyes were no
obstacle to them. I returned to my childhood: only my mother had not
been restored to me. I could see in my mind my Didimā letting her sparse
hair hang loose down her back in the sun, and laying out rows of baṛis in
the yard; but I no longer heard, in her sweet old quavering voice, the
lilting hymns of our village saint. The festival of the new rice-crop
boisterously rang through the moist winter air; but among the crowd
threshing the new paddy in the husking-shed, where were my village
playmates? In the evening I heard the lowing of the cattle from some
way off, and I remembered Mā with an evening lamp in her hand, on her
way to place it in the cowshed. The smell of damp fodder and burning
straw-smoke so entered my heart that I seemed to hear the cymbals and
bells from the Bidyalankars’ temple next to our village tank. It was as if
someone had sifted through all the things I had known in my first eight
years of life, and had wrapped me round with their quintessential
flavour.

I also recalled my childhood religious devotion – the way I picked
flowers at dawn to offer to Shiva. But alas, how Calcutta’s hustle and
bustle and chatter deform the mind! Religion loses its simplicity. A short
time after I became blind I remember a friend from my old village came
to me and said, ‘Aren’t you angry, Kumu? If I were in your shoes I
wouldn’t be able to stand the sight of your husband.’ I replied, ‘The sight
of him has been stopped, true, and I’m cross with my useless eyes for
that; but why should I blame my husband?’ Labanya was angry with him
for not having called a doctor in time, and was trying to make me angry
too. I explained to her that if we live in this world, our wisdom and
follies cause us – whether we like it or not – various kinds of pleasure
and pain; but if we keep a firm faith within, we can have peace even
amidst troubles – otherwise we spend our life in anger and rivalry and
conflict. Being blind was burden enough; so why should I increase the
burden by harbouring a grudge against my husband? Labanya was not
pleased to hear such old-fashioned notions from a girl like me, and she
went away, contemptuously shaking her head. But there can, I admit, be
poison in words: no words are wholly without effect. A few sparks from
her anger entered my mind; I stamped them out, but one or two burnmarks 
remained. This is why I say that there is too much talk, too much
chatter in Calcutta; one can so quickly become harsh and entrenched in
one’s thinking.

When I came to the village, the cool scent of śiuli-flowers picked as an
offering to Shiva revived my hopes and beliefs, made them bright and
fresh as they were in childhood. My heart and home were filled with the
Spirit of God. I bowed my head and said, ‘O Lord, it is good that my eyes
have gone, for you are mine.’

Alas, I was mistaken. To say of God ‘You are mine’ – even this is
vanity. ‘I am yours’ is all we have a right to say. And a day was soon to
come when God forced these words out of me: when nothing was left for
me, yet I had to struggle on; when I had no claim on anyone, only on
myself.

Life was happy for a while. My husband became quite a respected
doctor. His income became respectable too. But money is not a good
thing. It stunts the mind. When the mind is in control, it creates its own
pleasure; but when wealth takes up the pursuit of pleasure, there is
nothing for the mind to do. Where formerly the mind’s pleasure reigned,
possessions now stake their claim. Instead of happiness, we acquire
nothing but things.

I cannot pin-point a particular remark or event, but whether because a
blind person’s powers of perception are intensified, or for whatever other
reason, I was well able to see a change in my husband as his material
prosperity increased. The deep concern he had had, when young, for
justice and injustice, right and wrong, seemed to grow duller each day. I
remember how at one time he used to say, ‘I am not studying medicine
only to earn a living, but to bring as much benefit as possible to the
poor.’ On the subject of doctors who turned up at the doors of the dying
and would not even take a pulse without being paid in advance, he was
almost speechless with disgust. But I could see that was not so now. A
poor woman came and clung to his feet, begging him to save the life of
her only son, and he shook her off; in the end I persuaded him to treat
the boy, but his heart was not in it. I remember well my husband’s
attitude to corrupt earning in the days when we were short of money.
Now there was lots of money in the bank, yet a rich man’s secretary
came and had two days of secret discussions with my husband – I don’t
know what about; but when he came to me afterwards talking breezily
about other things, an uneasy feeling in my heart told me he was up to
no good.

Where was the husband I saw for the last time before I went blind? He
who had elevated me to a goddess by kissing me between my sightless
eyes, what had become of him? Those who suddenly fall prey to a raging
passion can pick themselves up again through another emotional
impulse; but those who, day by day, moment by moment, harden from
the marrow of their being, whose emotional capacities are throttled,
steadily, by outward success – for them I see no way out.

The visual gulf that had arisen between my husband and me was
nothing in itself; but I felt sick inside when I realized that where I was
now, he was not. I was blind – sitting in an inner region devoid of the
world’s light, with my youthful love still fresh, my devotion still intact,
my trust still unshaken: the dew of my gift of śephālī-flowers – arranged
with girlish care, offered to God at the start of my life – had still not
dried up; yet my husband had left my shaded, cool, eternally renewing
world, and was lost in the desert of money-making! All the things I
believed in, the faith I held to, all that I valued more than any worldly
treasure, were now scorned and dismissed by him from afar. At one time
there was no such rift; when we were young we had started along the
same road; but then (neither he nor I knew exactly when) our paths
divided, and now he was out of hearing when I called.

Sometimes I wondered if I made too much of things because I was
blind. With eyes, I could have seen the world as it is.

My husband himself one day told me no less. That morning an old
Muslim had come to ask him to treat his granddaughter for cholera. I
heard the man say, ‘I’m poor, sir, but Allah will bless you.’ My husband
said, ‘Whatever Allah will do is not enough; tell me first what you will
do for me.’ When I heard this I thought, ‘God has made me blind; why
not deaf too?’ The old man sighed, ‘O Allah!’ and took his leave. I at
once got my maid to bring him to the back door of the women’s
quarters, and said, ‘Bābā, here is some money to pay for your
granddaughter’s treatment. Fetch Dr Harish from the village – and pray
for my husband.’

All day I had no appetite. My husband woke up from his afternoon
nap and asked, ‘Why are you looking so glum?’ I was going to give my
usual answer – ‘It’s all right, there’s nothing wrong’ – but the time for
pretence had passed, and I said clearly, ‘I’ve been thinking of telling you
something for a long time, but I couldn’t think of how to say it. I don’t
know if I can explain to you what I am feeling, but I think you must
know in your heart that we who were one when we started our life
together have now become separate.’

My husband laughed and said, ‘Change is the way of the world.’

‘Money, beauty, youth may all be subject to change,’ I said, ‘but are
there no eternal values?’

He then said more seriously, ‘Think of women who have true cause for
complaint – with husbands who earn no money, or who do not love
them; you have plucked your misery out of the air!’ I realized then that
blindness had smeared my eyes with a salve that had set me apart from
this changeable world; I was not like other women; my husband would
never be able to understand me.

Meanwhile an aunt-in-law had come from her village to see how her
nephew was getting on. The first thing she said after we had taken the
dust of her feet was, ‘Well now, Baumā, you have unfortunately lost the
sight of your eyes. How is our Abinash supposed to run his household
with a blind wife? Let him marry again!’

If my husband had jokingly said ‘What a good idea, Pisimā – I put you
in charge of the match-making’, then I would have had nothing to worry
about. But he said with embarrassment, ‘Pisimā, I don’t know what you
are saying.’

‘What’s the matter?’ she replied. ‘I’m saying nothing wrong. Well now,
what do you say, Baumā?’

I smiled and said, ‘You’re not asking the right person for advice. If you
want to pick someone’s pocket, you don’t seek their prior agreement!’

‘Yes, you’re right there,’ said my aunt-in-law. ‘I suggest we confer
privately, Abinash. Agreed? And I say to you, Baumā, the more wives her
husband takes, the prouder a Kulin girl should be of him. Our Abinash
could marry instead of carrying on as a doctor, and he wouldn’t have to
worry about earning. When sick people fall into a doctor’s hands they
die, and once they’re dead they don’t pay him fees any more; but Kulin’s
wives are fated not to die, and the longer they live the more the husband
profits.’

Two days later my husband asked his aunt, in my presence, ‘Pisimā,
can you find me a woman of good family who could help my wife like a
relative? She can’t see, and if a companion was with her all the time I’d
be much less anxious.’ When I was newly blind such a suggestion would
have made more sense, but now I couldn’t think of any household task
that was awkward because of my blindness. Nevertheless, I made no
objection and kept silent.

‘That would be no problem,’ said my aunt-in-law. ‘My brother-in-law
has a daughter, as good as she is beautiful. She’s grown up, just waiting
for a suitable groom; if she could get a Kulin like you she could be
married at once.’

My husband said with alarm, ‘Who’s talking about marriage?’

To which my aunt-in-law said, ‘How can a girl of good family come
and live in your house without being married to you?’ That was true,
certainly, and my husband could not think of anything to counter it.

I stood alone, shut in the endless darkness of my blindness, crying out
to God to save my husband.

A few days later, as I came out from my morning pūjā, my aunt-in-law
said, ‘Baumā, the niece of mine I mentioned, Hemangini, has come today
from her village. Himu, this is your Didi, pay your respects to her.’

At that moment my husband appeared and, as if surprised at seeing an
unknown woman in the room, started to leave again.

My aunt-in-law said, ‘Where are you going, Abinash?’

‘Who is she?’ he asked.

‘She is my brother-in-law’s daughter – Hemangini,’ she replied. My
husband then proceeded to show unwarranted curiosity about when she
had come, who had brought her, what her background was, and so forth.
I thought to myself, ‘I understand everything that’s happening, so why
this pretence on top of everything else? Secrecy, covering up, lies! If you
have to do wrong to satisfy your lust, then do so – but why degrade
yourself further because of me? Why tell lies to deceive me?’

I took Hemangini’s hand and led her into my bedroom. I stroked her
face and body, and could tell that her face was beautiful, and her age
was not less than fourteen or fifteen. The girl broke out in delicious
laughter.

‘What are you doing?’ she said. ‘Are you trying to exorcize me or
something?’ At her simple, frank laughter, a dark cloud within me
seemed to lift at once.

I put my right arm round her shoulders and said, ‘I’m having a look at
you, bhāi.’ I then stroked her soft face again.

‘Having a look at me?’ She laughed again, and said, ‘Do you have to
feel me to see how big I am, like brinjal or beans in your garden?’

I then realized that Hemangini didn’t know that I was blind. ‘I’m
blind, you know, sister,’ I said. She was taken aback at this, and became
more serious. I could well imagine how intently she was studying my
face and my sightless eyes with her own curious, youthful, wide-open
eyes.

Then she said, ‘So this is why you invited Auntie here?’

‘No, I didn’t invite her,’ I said. ‘She kindly invited herself.’

‘Kindly?’ said the girl, with another laugh. ‘Her kindness will keep her
here a long time then. But why did my father send me here?’

Pisimā entered the room at that moment. She’d been having a long
talk with my husband. As soon as she came in, Hemangini said, ‘Auntie,
when are we going home, tell me?’

‘Well I never,’ said my aunt-in-law. ‘No sooner is she here than she
wants to go. I’ve never known such a restless girl.’

‘Auntie,’ said Hemangini, ‘I can see that you are in no hurry to leave.
You’re a relative here – you can stay as long as you like. But I’d like to
go – that’s what I’m telling you.’

She then took my arm and said, ‘What do you think, bhāi? You’re not
really relatives of mine.’ I embraced her instead of replying. I could see
that however domineering Pisimā might be, she was no match for this
girl. She betrayed no outward annoyance – indeed she tried to show
affection; but Hemangini brushed her aside. Laughing the whole matter
off as a spoilt girl’s joke, she started to leave – but then had further
thoughts and turned back, saying to Hemangini, ‘Himu, come along, it’s
time for your bath.’ Hemangini came up to me and said, ‘Let’s both of us
go to the ghāṭ – what do you say, bhāi?’ My aunt-in-law forbore to stop
us, despite her reluctance to let us go; she knew that if it came to a
tussle with Hemangini the girl would win – and besides, a quarrel
wouldn’t look good in front of me.

As we made our way to the ghāṭ behind the house, Hemangini asked,
‘Why haven’t you got any children?’

I smiled and said, ‘How should I know why not? God hasn’t given me
any.’

‘I dare say you had some kind of sin in you,’ said Hemangini.

‘That too is only known to God,’ I replied.

The girl said conclusively, ‘Look at Auntie, though. She has such
crookedness in her, no children can possibly form in her womb.’

I had no understanding myself of the mysteries of sin and virtue,
suffering and happiness, punishment and reward – so I couldn’t explain
them to the girl. All I could do was sigh and inwardly say to God, ‘You
know!’

Hemangini hugged me and said, laughing, ‘Oh dear, even my words
made you sigh! Usually no one listens to what I say!’

I noticed that my husband was beginning to neglect his medical
practice. If a call came from a long way off he did not go; if he went on a
call near by he would deal with it as quickly as possible. Formerly he
would stay in his surgery during gaps in his work, only coming home for
his midday meal and siesta. Now my aunt-in-law summoned him at all
hours, and he himself came to see her quite unnecessarily. When I heard
her calling out, ‘Himu, bring my pān-box, will you?’ I knew that my
husband was in his aunt’s room. For the first two or three days,
Hemangini fetched pān-box, oil-bowl, vermilion-pot or whatever else she
was asked for. But after that she refused to budge, and sent the maid
with the requested article. If my aunt-in-law called, ‘Hemangini, Himu,
Himi’, the girl would embrace me with a kind of intense pity: dread and
sorrow came over her. She would now never mention my husband in my
presence, even by mistake.

Meanwhile my elder brother came to see me. I knew how observant
he was. It would have been practically impossible to hide from him what
was afoot. My brother was a harsh judge of people. He never forgave the
slightest wrong-doing. My greatest fear was that he would see my
husband as a criminal. I tried to cover things up with a smokescreen of
excessive cheerfulness: by talking and fussing to an extreme degree, by
putting on an elaborate show. But this was so unnatural to me, it
increased the danger of detection. My brother, however, did not stay
very long: my husband’s uneasiness took the form of blatant rudeness
towards him – so he left. Before he went, he placed his hand – trembling
with pure love – on my head for a long time: I could feel the passionate
blessing his touch conveyed; his tears fell on my own tear-soaked cheeks.

That Caitra evening, I remember, market-goers were making their way
home. A storm was approaching, bringing rain from a long way off; one
could sense it in the dampness of the wind and the smell of wet earth.
People were anxiously calling for their friends in the dark fields. I never
sat with a lamp alight in the dark blindness of my bedroom, in case my
clothes caught fire by brushing against it, or some other accident
happened. I was sitting on the floor in my lonely dark room, clasping my
hands and crying out to the God of my blind world. I was saying: ‘Lord,
when I do not feel your mercy, when I do not understand your wishes,
what can I do but cling with all my might to the rudder of my helplessly
broken heart? Blood pours from my heart, but how can I control the
tempest? What further trials must I suffer, weak as I am?’ Tears streamed
down as I prayed – I buried my face in the bed and sobbed. I’d spent the
whole day doing housework. Hemangini had followed me like a shadow:
I’d had no chance to release the grief welling up inside me. That evening
at last the tears came out; and it was then that I noticed the bed stirring
a little, the swishing sound of someone moving about, and a moment
later Hemangini had come and thrown her arms round my neck and was
silently wiping my eyes with the end of her sari. She must have entered
the bedroom earlier in the evening, but when, and with what intention, I
could not tell. She did not ask a single question, and I also said nothing.
She slowly passed her cool hand across my brow. I have no idea when
the thunder and torrential rain of the storm passed; but at length a
quietness came and soothed my fevered heart.

The next day Hemangini said, ‘Auntie, you may not want to go home,
but there’s a servant who can take me back – so there!’

‘There’s no need for that,’ said my aunt-in-law. ‘I’m also going
tomorrow; we can go together. Look at this, Himu, our dear Abinash has
brought a pearl ring for you.’ She then proudly put the ring on to
Hemangini’s finger.

‘Now you watch, Auntie,’ said Hemangini, ‘what a good aim I have.’
She threw the ring through the window, right into the middle of the tank
behind the house.

My aunt-in-law bristled with anger and surprise and dismay. She
clutched my hands and said again and again, ‘Baumā, be sure you don’t
tell Abinash about this childish behaviour; the poor boy will be very hurt
if you do. Promise me, Baumā.’

‘You needn’t say any more, Pisimā,’ I said. ‘I shan’t tell him a thing.’

The next day before they left Hemangini embraced me and said, ‘Didi,
don’t forget me.’ I stroked her face with both hands and said, ‘The blind
never forget, sister. I have no world; I live only in my mind.’ I then took
her head and sniffed her hair and kissed her. My tears mingled with her
hair.

When Hemangini left, my world dried up. She had brought perfume
and beauty and music into my life, bright light and the softness of youth:
now that she was gone, what was there for me when I stretched out my
arms? My husband came and said with exaggerated gusto, ‘They’ve
gone! Now we can breathe again – now I can do some work.’ How
wretched I was! Why did he put on such an act? Did he think I was
afraid of the truth? Had I ever flinched at a blow? Didn’t my husband
know this? When I gave up my eyes, did I not accept eternal darkness
calmly?

For a long time blindness had been the only gulf between me and my
husband, but now there was a further division. My husband never
mentioned Hemangini’s name to me, even in error; as if she had been
totally removed from his world, as if she had never at any time made
any mark on it. Yet I could easily tell he was, frequently, inquiring after
her by letter. Just as when a pond fills up with flood-water so that 
lotusflowers tug at their stalks, whenever he was affected by even the
slightest elation I could feel a tugging at my heart. I was perfectly aware
of when he got news of her and when he did not. But I couldn’t ask him
about her. My soul longed to hear about the bright and beautiful star
who had briefly shone so vividly in the darkness of my heart, but I had
no right to speak of her to my husband even for a moment. On this,
there was a total silence between us, full of suppressed words and
feelings.

About the middle of Baisākh, the maid came to me and asked,
‘Māṭhākrun, they’re loading up a boat at the ghāṭ – where is the master
going?’ I knew that preparations were afoot. In the sky of my fate there
had been, for some days, a lull before the storm. Tattered clouds of
doom were gathering now: Shiva was silently pointing his finger,
amassing all his destructive power above my head – I knew that well.
But I said to my maid, ‘I’ve no idea. I haven’t heard anything.’ The maid
didn’t dare to ask any more questions, and left, sighing heavily.

Very late at night my husband came and said, ‘I’ve been called to a
place a long way off – I must leave at dawn tomorrow. I probably shan’t
be back for two or three days.’

I rose from my bed and said, ‘Why are you lying?’ He answered in a
weak trembling voice, ‘What lies have I told you?’

‘You are going to get married,’ I said.

He was silent. I also stood stock-still. For a long time no sound was
heard in the room. In the end I said, ‘Give me an answer. Say, “Yes, I’m
going to get married.” ’

He replied like an echo, ‘Yes, I’m going to get married.’

‘No,’ I said, ‘you will not be able to go. I shall save you from this
dreadful danger, this terrible sin. If I cannot do that, what kind of wife
am I? For what have I offered so many pūjās to Shiva?’

Once again the room fell silent for a long time. I slumped to the floor,
clung to my husband’s feet and said, ‘What wrong have I done you?
Where have I fallen short? What need have you for another wife? I beg
you, speak the truth.’

My husband then said slowly, ‘This is the truth: I am frightened of
you. Your blindness has covered you with a perpetual shroud, which I
have no means of piercing. You are like a goddess, terrifying as a
goddess – I cannot go on living with you for ever. I want an ordinary
woman whom I can scold, whom I can be angry with, whom I can
fondle, whom I can deck with ornaments.’

‘Cut open my breast and see!’ I said. ‘I am an ordinary woman – in my
heart I am nothing but that young bride you married. I want to believe, I
want to trust, I want to worship: do not demean yourself and bring
misery to me by raising me above you! Please, keep me in all respects
beneath you!’

I cannot remember all that I said. Does a turbulent sea hear its own
roaring? All I recall is that I said, ‘If I have been true to you, then God
will never allow you to break your righteous vows. Either I’ll be
widowed or Hemangini will die before you commit such a sin!’ With that
I fainted.

When I regained consciousness, the dawn chorus had not quite begun,
and my husband had gone. I shut myself into the prayer-room to
perform a pūjā. I stayed in the room for the whole day long. In the
evening we were shaken by a Kāl-baiśākhī storm. I did not say, ‘O God,
my husband is on the river now, look after him.’ I said, passionately,
‘God, let whatever is my fate happen, but save my husband from his
terrible sin.’ The whole night passed like this. I continued my pūjā
through the next day too. Who gave me strength to last for so long
without sleep and food I cannot say; but I stayed sitting like stone before
the stone image of the deity.

In the evening, someone started to push at the door from the outside.
When the door burst open, I passed out again. When I came round I
heard, ‘Didi!’ – and I found I was lying in Hemangini’s lap. When I
moved my head, her new wedding-sari rustled. O God, you did not heed
my prayer! My husband had fallen!

Hemangini lowered her head and said slowly, ‘I have come for your
blessing, Didi.’

For the first minute I froze; then I sat up and said, ‘Why should I not
bless you, sister? What wrong have you done?’

Hemangini laughed her sweet high laugh and said, ‘Wrong? Did you
do wrong when you married? What wrong is there in my marrying?’

I hugged her and laughed too. I said to myself, ‘Do my prayers have
the last word? Is God’s will not supreme? Let blows fall on my head if
they must, but I shall not let them fall on the place in my heart where I
keep my faith and religion. I shall stay as I was.’ Hemangini bent down
and took the dust of my feet. ‘May you be eternally blessed, eternally
happy,’ I said.

‘I want more than your blessing,’ she said, ‘I want you to welcome me
and my husband together into your chaste arms. You must not feel shy
about him. If you give me permission, I shall bring him here.’

‘Bring him,’ I said.

A little later I heard a new footfall in the room, and the affectionate
question, ‘Are you well, Kumu?’

I hurriedly stumbled from the bed and did obeisance to him, crying,
‘Dādā!’

‘What do you mean “Dādā”?” said Hemangini. ‘Don’t be silly! He is
your new bhagnīpati!’

I understood all. I knew that my elder brother had vowed not to get
married: our mother was no more, he had no one to push him into
marriage. He had married now because of me. Tears rolled down my
cheeks; I couldn’t stop them. My elder brother gently ran his hands
through my hair; Hemangini hugged me and went on laughing.

I couldn’t sleep that night. I waited with beating heart for my husband
to return. How would he contain his shame and bitterness?

Very late at night, the door opened slowly. I sat up with a start. It was
my husband’s step. My heart pounded. He came on to the bed and took
my hand and said, ‘Your brother saved me. I was in a state of madness
for a while and was about to destroy myself. When I got into the boat
God alone knew the weight that was pressing on my breast; when we ran
into a storm on the river and I feared for my very life, I thought, “If I
drown, I shall have been saved.” When I arrived at Mathurganj I was
told of the marriage, the previous day, of your brother and Hemangini. I
cannot describe the shame but also the joy with which I returned to the
boat. In these past few days I have learnt for sure that I would find no
happiness in deserting you. You are my goddess.’

I smiled and said, ‘No, I don’t want to be a goddess. I am the keeper of
your house – an ordinary woman.’

‘I also have a request,’ said my husband. ‘Never embarrass me again
by calling me a god.’

The next day the neighbourhood resounded with ululations and the
sound of conches.1 Hemangini began to tease my husband mercilessly,
from morning to night, at meals and at rest, giving him no relief; but no
one alluded to what had happened, or where he had gone.

