The widow living with the zamindar Sharadashankar’s family, in the big
house at Ranihat, had no blood-relatives left. One by one they had died.
In her husband’s family, too, there was no one she could call her own,
having no husband or son. But there was a little boy – her 
brother-inlaw’s son – who was the apple of her eye. His mother had been very ill
for a long time after his birth, so his Aunt Kadambini had brought him
up. Anyone who brings up someone else’s son becomes specially
devoted: there are no rights, no social claims – nothing but ties of
affection. Affection cannot prove itself with a legal document; nor does it
wish to. All it can do is love with doubled intensity, because it owns so
uncertainly.

Kadambini poured her frustrated widow’s love on to this boy, till one
night in Śrābaṇ she suddenly died. For some strange reason her
heartbeat stopped. Everywhere else, Time continued; yet in this one,
small, tender, loving heart its clock’s tick ceased. Keeping the matter
quiet, in case the police took notice, four Brahmin employees of the
zamindar quickly carried off the body to be burnt.

The cremation-ground at Ranihat was a long way from human
habitation. There was a hut on the edge of a tank there, and next to it an
immense banyan tree: nothing else at all on the wide open plain.
Formerly a river had flowed here – the tank had been made by digging
out part of the dried-up course of the river. The local people now
regarded this tank as a sacred spring. The four men placed the corpse
inside the hut and sat down to wait for the wood for the pyre to arrive.
The wait seemed so long that they grew restless: Nitai and Gurucharan
went off to see why the firewood was so long coming, while Bidhu and
Banamali sat guarding the corpse.

It was a dark monsoon night. The clouds were swollen; not a star
could be seen in the sky. The two men sat silently in the dark hut. One
of them had matches and a candle, wrapped up in his chadar. They
could not get the matches to light in the damp air, and the lantern they
had brought with them had gone out as well. After sitting in silence for a
long time, one of them said, ‘I could do with a puff of tobacco, bhāi. We
forgot everything in the rush.’

‘I’ll run and get some,’ said the other. ‘I won’t be a minute.’

‘That’s nice!’ said Bidhu, perceiving his motive. ‘I suppose I’m to stay
here on my own?’

They fell silent again. Five minutes seemed like an hour. They began
inwardly to curse the two who had gone to trace the firewood – no
doubt they were sitting comfortably somewhere having a smoke and
chatting. They were soon convinced that this must be so. There was no
sound anywhere – just the steady murmur of crickets and frogs round
the tank. Suddenly the bed seemed to stir a little, as if the dead body had
turned on to its side. Bidhu and Banamali began to shudder and mutter
prayers. Next moment a long sigh was heard: the two immediately fled
outside and ran off towards the village.

A couple of miles along the path they met their two companions
returning with lanterns in their hands. They had actually just been for a
smoke, and had found out nothing about the firewood. They claimed it
was being chopped up now and would not be long coming. Bidhu and
Banamali then described what had happened in the hut. Nitai and
Gurucharan dismissed this as nonsense, and rebuked the other two
angrily for deserting their post.

The four of them swiftly returned to the hut at the cremation-ground.
When they went in, they found that the corpse had gone: the bed was
empty. They stared at one another. Could jackals have made off with it?
But even the garment that covered it had gone. Searching about outside
the hut they noticed in a patch of mud by the door some recent, small,
woman’s footprints.

The zamindar, Sharadashankar, was not a fool: to try to tell him a
ghost-story would get them nowhere. After long discussion, the four
decided they had best say simply that the cremation had taken place.

When, towards dawn, the wood arrived at last, those who brought it
were told that in view of the delay the job had already been done, using
firewood stored in the hut. They had no reason to doubt this. A dead
body was not a valuable object: why should anyone wish to steal it?

II

It is well known that an apparently lifeless body can harbour dormant
life which in time may bring the body back to life. Kadambini had not
died: for some reason, her life-function had been suspended – that was
all.

When she regained consciousness, she saw dense darkness all around
her. She realized that the place where she was lying was not her usual
bedroom. She called out ‘Didi’ once, but no one in the dark room replied.
She sat up in alarm, recalling her death-bed – that sudden pain in her
chest, the choking for breath. Her eldest sister-in-law had been squatting
in a corner of the room warming her little son’s milk on a stove –
Kadambini had collapsed on to the bed, no longer able to stand.
Gasping, she had called, ‘Didi, bring the little boy to me – I think I’m
dying.’ Then everything had gone black, as if an inkpot had been poured
over a page of writing. Kadambini’s entire memory and consciousness,
all the letters in her book of life, became at that moment
indistinguishable. She had no recollection of whether her nephew had
called out ‘Kākimā’ for the last time, in his sweet loving voice; whether
she had been given that final viaticum of love, to sustain her as she
travelled from the world she knew, along Death’s strange and endless
path.

Her first feeling was that the land of death must be one of total
darkness and desolation. There was nothing to see there, nothing to
hear, nothing to do except sit and wait, forever awake. Then she
suddenly felt a chilly, rainy wind through an open door, and heard the
croaking of monsoon frogs; and all her memories of the monsoon, from
childhood right through her short life, rose in her mind. She felt the
touch of the world again. There was a flash of lightning: for an instant
the tank, the banyan tree, the vast plain and a distant row of trees
showed themselves before her eyes. She remembered how she had
sometimes bathed in the tank on sacred occasions; how seeing dead
bodies in the cremation-ground there had made her aware of the
awesomeness of death.

Her immediate idea was that she should return home. But then she
thought, ‘I’m not alive – they won’t take me back. It would be a curse on
them. I am exiled from the land of the living – I am my own ghost.’ If
that were not so, how had she come at dead of night from the safe inner
quarters of Sharadashankar’s house to this remote cremation-ground?
But if her funeral rites had not yet been completed, then what had
become of the people who should have burned her? She recalled her last
moments before dying, in the well-lit Sharadashankar residence; then,
finding herself alone in this distant, deserted, dark cremation-ground,
she again said to herself, ‘I no longer belong to the world of living
people. I am fearsome, a bringer of evil; I am my own ghost.’

As this realization struck, all ties and conventions seemed to snap. It
was as if she had weird power, boundless liberty – to go where she liked,
do what she liked; and with the onset of this feeling she dashed out of
the hut like a madwoman, like a gust of wind – ran out into the dark
burning-ground with not the slightest shame, fear or worry in her mind.
But her legs were tired as she walked, and her body began to weaken.
The plain stretched on endlessly, with paddy-fields here and there and
knee-deep pools of water. As dawn broke slowly, village bamboo-groves
could be seen, and one or two birds called. She now felt very afraid. She
had no idea where she stood in the world, what her relation to living
people would be. So long as she was in the wide open plain, in the
burning-ground, in the darkness of the Srābaṇ night, she remained
fearless, as if in her own realm. Daylight and human habitation were
what terrified her. Men fear ghosts, but ghosts fear men: they are two
separate races, living on opposite sides of the river of death.

III
Wandering around at night like a madwoman, with her mud-smeared
clothes and weird demeanour, Kadambini would have terrified anyone,
and boys would probably have run away and thrown pebbles at her from
a distance. Fortunately the first passer-by to see her in this condition was
a gentleman.

‘Mā,’ he said, approaching her, ‘you look as though you come from a
good family: where are you going to, alone on the road like this?’

At first Kadambini did not reply, and merely stared blankly at him.
She felt totally at a loss. That she was out in the world, that she looked
well-born, that a passer-by was asking her questions – all this was
beyond her grasp.

The gentleman spoke again. ‘Come along, Mā, I’ll take you home. Tell
me where you live.’

Kadambini began to think. She could not imagine returning to her inlaws’ 
house, and she had no parental home; but then she remembered
her childhood friend Yogmaya. Although she had not seen her since
childhood, they had sometimes exchanged letters. At times there had
been an affectionate rivalry between them, with Kadambini asserting
that nothing was greater than her love for Yogmaya, while Yogmaya
suggested that Kadambini was not responding sufficiently to her own
affection. But neither doubted that if opportunity to meet arose again,
neither would wish to lose sight of the other. ‘I’m going to
Shripaticharan’s house at Nishindapur,’ said Kadambini to the
gentleman.

The man was going to Calcutta. Nishindapur was not near by, but it
was not out of his way. He personally saw Kadambini to Shripaticharan
Babu’s house.

The two friends were a little slow to recognize each other, but soon
their eyes lit up as each saw a childhood resemblance in the other. ‘Well
I never,’ said Yogmaya. ‘I never thought that I would see you again. But
what brings you here? Did your in-laws kick you out?’

Kadambini was silent at first, then said, ‘Bhāi, don’t ask me about my
in-laws. Give me a corner in your house, as a servant. I’ll work for you.’

‘What an idea!’ said Yogmaya. ‘How can you be a servant? You’re my
friend, you’re like –’ and so on. Then Shripati came into the room.
Kadambini gazed at him for a moment, then slowly walked out, without
covering her head or showing any other sign of modesty or respect.
Afraid that Shripati would take offence at her friend’s behaviour,
Yogmaya made apologies for her. But so little explanation was necessary
– indeed, Shripati accepted her excuses so easily – that she felt uneasy.

Kadambini joined her friend’s household, but she could not be
intimate with her – Death stood between them. If one doubts or is
conscious of oneself, one cannot unite with another. Kadambini looked
at Yogmaya as if she and her house and husband were in a different,
distant world. ‘They are people of the world,’ she felt, ‘with their loves
and feelings and duties, and I am an empty shadow. They are in the land
of the living, whereas I belong to Eternity.’

Yogmaya was also puzzled, could not understand anything. Women
cannot bear mystery, for this reason: that poetry, heroism or learning
can thrive on uncertainty but household arts cannot. Therefore women
thrust aside what they don’t understand, maintaining no connection with
it, or else they replace it with something they themselves have made –
something more useful. If they cannot do either of these, they get angry.
The more impenetrable Kadambini became, the more resentful Yogmaya
became towards her, wondering why she had been burdened with such
trouble.

There was a further problem. Kadambini was terrified of herself. Yet
she could not run away from herself. Those who are frightened of ghosts
look backwards in terror – they are frightened of what they cannot see.
But Kadambini was terrified of her inner self – nothing outside
frightened her. Thus, in the silence of midday, she would sit alone in her
room and sometimes shout out loud; and in the evening, the sight of her
shadow in the lamplight made her quiver all over. Everyone in the house
was alarmed by her fear. The maids and servants and Yogmaya herself
began to see ghosts all over the place. Eventually, in the middle of the
night, Kadambini came out of her bedroom, wailing; she came right up
to the door of Yogmaya’s room and cried, ‘Didi, Didi, I beg you! Do not
leave me alone!’

Yogmaya was as angry as she was frightened. She would have driven
Kadambini out of the house, there and then. The kindly Shripati, with
great effort, managed to calm Kadambini down and settle her in an
adjoining room.

The next day Shripati received an unexpected summons from the
inner part of the house. Yogmaya burst into a torrent of accusation: ‘So!
A fine man you are. A woman leaves her own husband’s home and takes
up residence in your house – months have gone by but she shows no sign
of leaving – and I’ve heard not the slightest objection from you. What
are you thinking of? You men are a fine lot.’

In fact, of course, men are unthinkingly weak about women, and
women can accuse them all the more because of this. Even if he had
been willing to swear on his life that his concern for the pathetic yet
beautiful Kadambini was no more than was proper, his behaviour
suggested otherwise. He had said to himself, ‘The people in her
husband’s house must have treated this childless widow with great
injustice and cruelty, so that she was forced to flee and take refuge with
me. She has no father or mother – so how can I desert her?’ He had
refrained from inquiring about her background, not wishing to upset her
by questioning her on this unwelcome subject. But his wife was now
objecting strongly to his passive, charitable attitude; and he realized he
would have to inform Kadambini’s in-laws of her whereabouts, if he was
to keep the peace in his household. In the end he decided it would not
be fruitful to write a letter; it would be better to go to Ranihat
personally to find out what he could.

Shripati set off, and Yogmaya went to Kadambini and said, ‘My dear,
it doesn’t seem advisable for you to stay here any more. What will
people say?’

‘I have no connection with people,’ said Kadambini, looking solemnly
at Yogmaya.

Yogmaya was nonplussed. ‘You may not have,’ she said irritably, ‘but
we have. How can we go on putting up someone else’s widow?’

‘Where is my husband’s house?’ said Kadambini.

‘Hell!’ thought Yogmaya. ‘What is the woman on about?’

‘Who am I to you?’ said Kadambini slowly. ‘Am I of this world? All of
you here smile, weep, love, possess things; I merely look on. You are
human beings; I am a shadow. I do not understand why God has put me
in your midst. You’re worried that I’ll damage your happiness – I in turn
cannot understand what my relation is to you. But since the Almighty
has kept no other place for the likes of me, I shall wander round you and
haunt you even if you cut me off.’

Her stare and the tone of her words were such that Yogmaya
understood their import, even if she did not understand them literally
and was unable to reply. She could not manage any more questions.
Gloomy and oppressed, she left the room.

IV
Shripati did not return from Ranihat until nearly ten at night. The whole
world seemed awash with torrential rain. With its thudding sound, it
gave the impression that it would never end, that the night would never
end.

‘What happened?’ asked Yogmaya.

‘It’s a long story,’ said Shripati. ‘I’ll tell you later.’ He took off his wet
clothes, had something to eat and after smoking for a bit went to bed.
He seemed very preoccupied. Yogmaya suppressed her curiosity all this
while, but when she got into bed she asked, ‘What did you find out? Tell
me.’

‘You are certainly mistaken,’ said Shripati.

Yogmaya was rather annoyed at this. Women do not make mistakes,
or if they do men are wiser not to mention them; it is safest to let them
pass without complaining. ‘In what way?’ asked Yogmaya heatedly.

‘The woman you have accepted into your house,’ said Shripati, ‘is not
your friend Kadambini.’

Such a remark – especially from one’s husband – might reasonably
cause offence. ‘So I don’t know my own friend?’ said Yogmaya. ‘I have to
wait for you to identify her? What an absurd thing to say!’

Shripati replied that its absurdity or otherwise was not the point:
proof was what counted. There was no doubt whatsoever that
Kadambini had died.

‘Listen,’ said Yogmaya. ‘You’ve got into a complete muddle. Whatever
you heard in whatever place you went to can’t be right. Who asked you
to go anyway? If you had written a letter, everything would have been
made clear.’

Distressed by his wife’s lack of confidence in his efficiency, Shripati
started to explain all the proofs in detail – but to no avail. They went on
arguing into the small hours. Shripati believed their guest had been
deceiving his wife all this time, and Yogmaya believed she had deserted
her family; so both were agreed that Kadambini should be evicted from
the house immediately. But neither was willing to admit defeat in the
argument. Their voices rose higher and higher, and they forgot that
Kadambini was lying in the next room.

‘It’s a terrible thing,’ said one voice. ‘I heard what happened with my
own ears.’

‘How can I accept that?’ shouted the other. ‘I can see her with my own
eyes.’

Eventually Yogmaya said, ‘All right, tell me when Kadambini died.’
She hoped, by finding a discrepancy with the date of one of Kadambini’s
letters, to prove that Shripati was wrong. But they worked out that the
date given to Shripati was exactly one day before Kadambini had come
to their house. Yogmaya felt a racing in her heart at this, and Shripati
too began to feel unnerved. Suddenly the door of their room blew open,
and a damp wind put out their lamp. The darkness outside instantly
filled their whole room from floor to ceiling. Kadambini came and stood
right inside their room. It was half past two in the morning: the rain
outside was relentless.

‘Friend,’ said Kadambini, ‘I am your Kadambini, but I am no longer
alive. I am dead.’

Yogmaya yelled out in terror; Shripati was speechless.
‘But other than being dead, what harm have I done to you? If I have
no place in this world, or in the next world, then where shall I go?’ And
again, in the rain and the night, as if to wake God from his sleep, she
screamed, ‘Oh, tell me, where shall I go?’ Then, leaving the
dumbfounded husband and wife in the dark house, Kadambini fled in
search of her place in or beyond the world.

V
It is hard to say how Kadambini returned to Ranihat. She did not show
herself to anyone at first: she spent the whole day, without food, in a
ruined deserted temple. When evening came – early, as it does in the
monsoon, and oppressively dark – and the villagers, fearing a storm, had
retreated into their houses, Kadambini emerged on to the road again. As
she approached her in-laws’ house, her heart started to pound; but she
pulled her heavy veil round her head like a servant, and the gate-keepers
did not prevent her from entering. Meanwhile the rain had come on
even harder, and the wind blew more fiercely.

The mistress of the house – Sharadashankar’s wife – was playing cards
with her widowed sister-in-law. The maid was in the kitchen, and the
little boy was lying in the bedroom, sleeping after a bout of fever.
Kadambini entered the bedroom, without anyone noticing. It was
impossible to say why she had returned to her in-laws’ house – she
herself did not know why – but she knew that she wanted to see the
little boy again. She gave no thought to where she would go after that,
or what would happen to her.

She saw, in the lamplight, the thin, frail little boy lying asleep with his
fists clenched. Her racing heart thirsted when she saw him: how she
longed to clasp him to her breast one last time, to protect him from all
misfortune! But then she thought, ‘Now that I am not here, who will
look after him? His mother loves company, gossiping, playing cards; for
a long time she was happy to leave him in my care; she never had to
bother with his upbringing. Who will take care of him, as I did?’ The
little boy suddenly turned over and, half-asleep, said, ‘Kākimā, give me
some water.’ ‘O my darling,’ she inwardly replied, ‘my treasure: you
haven’t yet forgotten your Kākimā.’ At once she poured out some water
from the pitcher and, raising him up against her breast, helped him to
drink.

While he remained half-asleep, the little boy showed no surprise at
taking water from his aunt as he had been used to doing. But when
Kadambini – fulfilling her longstanding desire – kissed him, and then
laid him down again, he came out of his sleep and hugged her, asking,
‘Kākimā, did you die?’

‘Yes, my darling,’ she said.

‘Have you come back to me? You won’t die again?’

Before she could reply an uproar broke out: a maid had come into the
room with a bowl of sago in her hand, but had then screamed and fallen
down in a faint. Hearing her scream, Sharadashankar’s wife dropped her
cards and came running: she stiffened like wood when she was in the
room, unable either to flee or utter a word. Seeing all this, the boy
himself took fright. ‘Kākimā, you must go,’ he said, wailing.

Kadambini felt for the first time now that she had not died. The
ancient house, everything in it, the little boy, his affection – they were
all equally alive to her; there was no gulf intervening between her and
them. When she had been in her friend’s house she had felt dead, felt
that the person whom her friend had known had died. But now that she
was in her nephew’s room, she realized that his Kākimā had never died
at all.

‘Didi,’ she said pathetically, ‘why are you frightened of me? See – I am
just as I was.’

Her sister-in-law could not keep her balance any longer; she collapsed
unconscious.

Informed by his sister, Sharadashankar Babu himself came into the
inner quarters. Clasping his hands he begged, ‘Sister-in-law, it is not
right of you to do this. Shatish is the only son in the family: why are you
casting your eye on him? Are we strangers to you? Ever since you went,
he has wasted away day by day; he has been constantly ill, calling out
“Kākimā, Kākimā” day and night. Now that you have bid farewell to the
world, please stop attaching yourself to him, please go away – we’ll
perform your proper funerary rites.’

Kadambini could bear no more. She screamed out, ‘I did not die, I did
not die, I tell you! How can I make you understand – I did not die! Can’t
you see: I am alive.’ She seized the bell-metal bowl that had been
dropped on the ground and dashed it against her brow: blood gushed out
from the impact. ‘See here, I am alive!’

Sharadashankar stood like a statue; the little boy whimpered for his
father; the two stricken women lay on the ground. Crying out, ‘I did not
die, I did not die, I did not die,’ Kadambini fled from the room and down
the stairs, and threw herself into the tank in the inner courtyard of the
house. Sharadashankar heard, from the upper floor, a splashing sound.

It went on raining all night, and it was still raining the next morning;
even in the afternoon there was no let-up. Kadambini had proved, by
dying, that she had hot died.

