I had to leave my homestead. I shall not tell you directly how this
happened, only indirectly.

I was the native doctor in the village, and my house was opposite the
police station. I was as intimate with the Police Inspector as I was with
Death – aware, therefore, of the torments inflicted on humanity by Man
and by his Protector.1 And just as jewels and bangles, worn together,
enhance each other, so the Inspector drew financial benefit from my
interventions and I from his.

Yes, my friendship with Lalit Chakrabarti, Police Inspector,
experienced fixer, was very special. It made me almost as vulnerable to
his repeated suggestion that I and a spinster relative of his should marry
as she was herself. But I could not bear to subject Shashi, my only
daughter, motherless though she was, to a stepmother. Every year
moments defined by the almanac as auspicious for a wedding passed by.
I watched many worthy and not so worthy grooms climb into
palanquins, and all I could do was join the groom’s party, eat 
weddingfeasts in other people’s houses, and return home with a sigh.

Shashi was twelve – nearly thirteen. I’d had some indication from a
certain well-placed family that if I could get together a decent sum of
money, I’d be able to marry her into it. And if that could be
accomplished, I would then turn my attention to my own matrimonial
arrangements.

I was brooding one day over this pressing need for money, when
Harinath Majumdar of Tulsi village came to me in a state of desperation.
What had happened was that his widowed daughter had suddenly died
in the night, and enemies of his had written letters to the Police
Inspector insinuating that she had died from an abortion. The police now
wanted to examine her dead body.

The shame of this on top of his grief for his dead daughter was more
than he could bear. I was a doctor, and a friend of the Inspector: surely I
could do something?

When the Goddess of Prosperity wishes to call, she comes sometimes
through the front door, sometimes through the back. I shook my head
and said, ‘I’m afraid it’s a complex matter.’ I cited a couple of bogus
precedents, and the trembling old Harinath wept like a child.

To cut a long story short, Harinath had to beggar himself in order to
give his daughter her proper funeral rites.

My daughter Shashi came to me and asked me pitifully, ‘Father, why
did that old man come and weep before you like that?’

‘Run along,’ I said crossly. ‘That’s no business of yours.’

The path to finding a groom to whom I could give my daughter was
now smoothed. The wedding-date was fixed. She being my only
daughter, I planned the wedding-feast elaborately. I had no wife, so kind
neighbours helped me. The penniless but grateful Harinath laboured for
me night and day.

On the eve of the wedding – the day when bride and bridegroom are
dabbed with turmeric – at three in the morning, Shashi suddenly went
down with cholera, and quickly grew worse and worse. After every
effort, after hurling bottle upon bottle of useless medicine to the ground,
I rushed to Harinath and fell on my knees before him. ‘Forgive me,
Dādā,’ I cried. ‘Forgive me for my sin! She is my only daughter. I have
no one else.’

‘What are you doing, Doctor Babu, what are you doing?’ said
Harinath, greatly perplexed. ‘I shall always be indebted to you! Don’t
kneel before me!’

‘I ruined you, though you had done nothing wrong,’ I said. ‘Because of
my sin, my daughter is dying.’

I started to shout to everyone, ‘Oh, I ruined this old man, and am
being punished for it! God, God, save my Shashi!’

I seized Harinath’s sandal and started beating myself on the head with
it. The old man, greatly embarrassed, snatched it back from me.
The next day at ten o’clock, with the turmeric still on her, Shashi bid
farewell for ever to this world.

The very next day after that, the Inspector said, ‘Well, why don’t you
get married now? You need someone to look after you.’

This kind of callous disrespect for a man’s grief would have shamed
even the Devil! But I had fallen in with the Inspector on so many other
occasions that I could not bring myself to speak. How my friendship with
him stung and shamed me now!

However pained the heart, life has to go on. One has to turn one’s full
energy again to the normal effort of finding food to eat, clothes to wear,
wood for the stove, laces for one’s shoes. In intervals from work, when I
sat alone in my house, I would sometimes hear in my ear that pitiful
question, ‘Father, why was that old man weeping before you?’ I
rethatched Harinath’s tumbledown house at my own expense, gave him
my own milch-cow, and redeemed his plot of land from the moneylender.

Unbearably grief-stricken, alone in the evenings and sleepless at night,
I could not stop thinking: ‘My tender-hearted daughter – even though
she has escaped this life – has found no peace in the next world from her
father’s cruel misdeeds. She seems to keep on returning in distress,
asking, “Father, why did you do that?” ’

For a while I was in such a state that I found it impossible to ask poor
people for fees for medical treatment. If any young girl was ill, I felt it
was my Shashi who was ill by proxy; I saw her in all the sick girls in the
village.

The village was now awash with heavy rain. Fields and houses could
be reached only by boat. The rain started early in the morning and went
on all day.

A call came to me from the zamindar’s office. The zamindar’s boatman
would not stand any delay and was agitating to leave at once.

Formerly, when I had to go out in such weather, there had been
someone to open my ancient umbrella for me and see if there were any
holes in it; and an anxious voice would ask me over and over again to be
careful to protect myself from the damp wind and lashings of rain.
Today as I looked for my umbrella in the empty, silent house, I paused
for a moment to recall her loving face. I looked at her closed bedroom
and wondered why God had arranged – for a person who gave no
thought to the sorrows of others – such a supply of love. As I passed the
door of that empty room, I felt a deep ache in my chest. But then, at the
sound of the zamindar’s servant irascibly shouting for me, I quickly
suppressed my grief and went outside.

As I climbed into the boat I saw a small canoe tied to the policestation 
ghāt, with a farmer in it, soaking wet, wearing only a loincloth. I
asked him what was up, and he told me that last night his daughter had
been bitten by a snake – the wretched man had had to come all the way
from a distant village to report it. I could see he had taken off his only
garment to cover the dead body.

The impatient boatman from the zamindar’s office untied the rope and
we set off. At one o’clock I returned to my house and saw that the man
was still sitting, soaked, with his knees huddled up to his chin; the
Inspector Babu had not yet appeared. I sent him part of my midday
meal. He refused to touch it.

After eating quickly I again had to set out to see the patient in the
zamindar’s office. In the evening when I returned the fellow was still
sitting, in a nearly catatonic state. When I questioned him he was
scarcely able to reply; he just stared at me. This river, village and police
station; this drenched, cloudy, muddy world; to him it was as hazy as a
dream. By repeated questioning I learnt that a constable had come out
once to ask him if he had any money tucked into the loincloth. He had
told him he was very poor – he had nothing. The constable had said,
‘Wait, you rogue, sit and wait.’

I had often seen sights like this before, and never thought anything of
them. But today I could not stand it. My Shashi’s plaintive, silenced
voice seemed to throb through the entire rainy sky. This speechless,
daughterless farmer’s unendurable grief seemed to beat against my own
ribs.

The Inspector Babu was sitting comfortably on a wicker stool,
smoking a hookah. An uncle – the one who had a daughter to dispose of
– had recently arrived with me in mind: he was sitting on a mat and
chatting. I burst in on them like a storm. I bellowed at them, ‘Are you
men or monsters?’ and banged my whole day’s earnings down in front of
them saying, ‘If you want money, take this: go to hell with it. Give that
fellow outside a break now. Let him cremate his daughter.’

The love between the doctor and the Inspector, which the tears and
torments of many others had nourished, crashed to the ground in that
storm.

Not long after, I myself was on my knees before the Inspector, praising
his greatness and bewailing my own stupidity; but I still had to leave my
homestead.

