Towards evening the storm grew steadily worse. What with the lashing
of the rain, the claps of thunder and flashes of lightning, it was like war
between gods and demons in the sky. Great black clouds rolled hither
and thither like banners proclaiming world-destruction; rebellious waves
danced across the river, crashing on the shore; huge trees in the garden
groaned as their branches heaved and thrashed to right and left.
Meanwhile in a bungalow in Chandernagore, in a shuttered room lit
only by an oil-lamp, a husband and wife sat on bedding spread out on
the floor by a bed and talked.

‘In a little while,’ Sharat Babu was saying, ‘you’ll be quite recovered,
and we can go back home.’

‘I’m better already,’ said Kiranmayi. ‘It won’t hurt me to go home
now.’

Any married person will know that the conversation was not actually
so brief. The question was simple, but the argument to and fro fell short
of a solution. It spun faster and faster like a boat without oars, till it
seemed in danger of sinking in floods of tears.

‘The doctor says,’ said Sharat Babu, ‘you should stay a bit longer.’

‘Does the doctor know everything?’ said Kiran.

‘You must know,’ said Sharat, ‘that this is the season back home in
which it’s easy to catch infections. You should wait for another month or
so.’

‘Are you saying there are no infections here?’ said Kiran.
What had happened was this. Kiran was loved by everyone in the
household, even by her mother-in-law. When she fell badly ill, they were
all alarmed; and when the doctor advised a change of air, her husband
and mother-in-law were pleased to take her, gladly abandoning work
and household. Village wiseacres questioned whether recovery would
necessarily arise from the change: wasn’t it rather modish and excessive
to make such a fuss about a young wife – as if no one else’s wife got ill
sometimes, or people were immortal in Chandernagore? Was there any
place where the prescriptions of Fate did not apply? But Sharat and his
mother paid no heed. The life of their darling Kiranmayi was more
important than the collective wisdom of the village. When a loved one is
threatened, people are often irrational.

Sharat took a bungalow in Chandernagore, and Kiran recovered from
her illness: she was just still rather weak. There was a touching
feebleness in her face and eyes, so that anyone looking at her felt, with
quaking heart, that she’d had a most narrow escape.

But Kiran was jolly by nature, gregarious. She didn’t like being alone
in this place. She had nothing to do in the house, no neighbours or
friends; simply nurturing her health all day bored her to death. The dose
of medicine every hour, the watching of her temperature and diet – it
was all very irksome. This was why husband and wife were quarrelling
in a shuttered room this stormy night.

So long as Kiran came up with replies, the argument proceeded
equally; but in the end she resorted to silence. She sat with her head
bowed and her face turned away from Sharat, who now found himself
weak and weaponless. He was just about to give up the fight, when the
Bearer was heard loudly calling from outside. Sharat opened the door.
He was told that a young Brahmin boy had been shipwrecked – he’d
swum ashore to their garden. Kiran’s anger and misery disappeared
when she heard this, and at once she sent some dry clothes from the
ālnā. In no time she had warmed a pan of milk and called for the boy to
come in.

He had long hair, large round eyes, and no sign of a moustache. Kiran
sat with him as he ate, and asked him about himself. She heard that he
belonged to a band of travelling players, and his name was Nilkanta.
They’d been engaged to perform at the Sinhas’ house near by, but had
been shipwrecked, and who knew what had happened to the others in
the troupe? The boy was a good swimmer, so he’d saved himself. Here
he was! Kiran felt a surge of tenderness towards him as she realized how
easily he could have died.

‘This will be a good thing,’ thought Sharat to himself. ‘Kiran has
something new to do – it will keep her going for a while.’ His mother,
too, welcomed the merit to be gained from caring for a Brahmin boy;
and Nilkanta himself was pleased to escape from death and his former
master into the arms of this rich family.

Before very long, Sharat and his mother began to change their minds.
They felt that the boy had stayed long enough – there’d be trouble if
they didn’t get rid of him soon. Nilkanta had begun to smoke Sharat’s
hookah in secret, puffing away grandly. On rainy days he would
shamelessly take Sharat’s favourite silk umbrella and strut around the
village making new friends. A dirty stray dog he had petted brazenly
frequented Sharat’s finely furnished room, leaving pawprints on the
spotless floor-cover to record its gracious visits. A large circle of young
admirers formed round Nilkanta, and the village mangoes were given no
chance to ripen that year.

Kiran was far too lavish with the boy – there was no doubt of that.
Her husband and mother-in-law often took her to task for this, but she
ignored them. She decked him out like a Babu, giving him Sharat’s old
shirts and socks, and new shoes, dhoti and chadar. She would call him at
whim, to satisfy her need to show affection as well as her sense of fun.
She would sit smiling on the bed, pān-box beside her, with a maidservant
combing and drying her long wet hair, while Nilkanta acted with
flamboyant gestures the story of Nala and Damayanti. This way, the long
afternoon passed quickly. She tried to get Sharat to come and watch the
performance, but this annoyed him, and in any case in front of Sharat
Nilkanta’s talent failed to shine. Sometimes Kiran’s mother-in-law came,
attracted by the gods in the story; but her customary afternoon
sleepiness soon defeated her piety – she would end up lying on her back.

Nilkanta was often subjected to cuffs and boxes on the ear from
Sharat, but used as he was from birth to even harsher methods of
discipline he didn’t feel either hurt or dishonoured. He firmly believed
that just as the world was divided between sea and land, so human life
was divided between food and beatings – and beatings were the larger
part of it.

It was difficult to tell exactly how old he was. If he was fourteen or
fifteen, one would say his face had matured beyond his years; if he was
seventeen or eighteen, one would call him underdeveloped. He was
younger than he looked, or else he looked younger than he was. Because
he had joined the troupe of players at an early age, he acted Radha,
Damayanti, Sita, and ‘Vidya’s confidante’. The needs of his master and
the will of God coincided, and his growth stopped. Everyone thought of
him as small, and he thought of himself as small: he was never treated as
befitted his true age. Through such causes natural and unnatural, by the
time he was seventeen, he looked more like an overdeveloped 
fourteenyear-old than an underdeveloped seventeen-year-old. His lack of
moustache added to this false impression. Whether from smoking
tobacco, or from using language ill-suited to his years, his lips had an
adult curl to them; but his eyes, with their large pupils, were simple and
childish. One could say that inside he was a child, but his yātrā-life had
made him adult on the surface.

Nature’s relentless laws, however, worked on him as he stayed on in
Sharat Babu’s Chandernagore bungalow. Held back at the threshold for
so long, he quietly crossed it at last. His seventeen or eighteen years of
growth attained their proper ripeness.

The change was not evident from the outside, but it was there in the
way Nilkanta felt hurt and embarrassed when Kiran continued to treat
him like a boy. One day she frivolously asked him to dress as a female
sakhī: her request was suddenly awkward for him, though he couldn’t
see why it was so. These days, if she asked him to imitate a 
yātrā performance, he would run from her sight. He was no longer willing to
think of himself as a juvenile member of a sordid yātrā-troupe. He had
even made up his mind to try to learn to read and write with the
manager of the bungalow. But because Nilkanta was Kiran’s pet, the
manager couldn’t stand him; and so unaccustomed was he to
concentrated study that the letters swam before his eyes. He would sit
for hours on the river-bank leaning against a champak tree, with a book
open on his lap: the water gurgled gently, boats floated past, fidgety
birds on the branches made their irrelevant chirping comments, and
Nilkanta kept his eyes on the book – but what he was thinking he alone
knew, or maybe he didn’t. He could hardly move from one sentence to
another, but he liked to feel he was reading a book. Whenever a boat
passed, he would hold up the book impressively, mutter, and make a
great show of reading; but as soon as the spectators had gone, his
enthusiasm waned again.

Formerly he sang yātrā-songs mechanically; but now their melodies
caused a strange disturbance in his mind. The words were utterly trivial,
full of meretricious wordplay: their meaning was impenetrable – but
when he sang,

O swan, swan, Brahmin twice born,
Why are you so heartless?
Say for what good, in this wild wood,
Do you threaten the life of a princess?

he was suddenly now transported to a different life and world. The
familiar scene around him and his insignificant life were transformed
into song, took on a new appearance. The swan and the princess created
extraordinary pictures in his mind: who he thought he was he couldn’t
exactly say, but he forgot he was an orphan boy from a yātrā-troupe.
Just as a miserable grubby child in a wretched hovel somewhere listens
at night to the story of ‘The Prince, the Princess and the Ruby’, and in
the dimly lit darkness of his dingy home is released from deprivation,
finding in a fairy-tale world in which anything is possible a new beauty,
a brighter aspect, a matchless power; so this yātrā-boy was able to see,
through the tunes of these songs, both himself and his world in a new
light. The sound of the water, the rustling of leaves, the call of birds, the
smiling face of the kind woman who had given this friendless boy her
protection, her loving bangle-laden arms, her preciously beautiful 
lotuspink feet – all were transformed into music by who knows what
miraculous magic! But another time this musical mirage was swept
away: the yātrā-boy with his long shaggy hair was rediscovered, and
Sharat – informed by the owner of a mango-orchard – was upon him,
thwacking him with slaps on his cheeks; and Nilkanta would flee to his
band of devoted followers to seek new excitement on land or in water or
the branches of trees.

Meanwhile Sharat’s brother Satish had come to stay in the house for
his Calcutta college-holiday. Kiran was delighted – now she had
something new to occupy her. He was equal to her in age: in her dress,
manners, or in serving him at meals she teased him at every turn.
Sometimes she smeared her palms with vermilio and pressed them over
his eyes; sometimes she wrote ‘monkey’ on the back of his shirt;
sometimes she bolted his door from outside and ran off merrily. Satish
was not a man to be outdone: he would get his own back by stealing her
keys, putting chillies in her pān, or slyly tying the end of her sari to her
bed. Thus they spent the day teasing and chasing and laughing – or
quarrelling, weeping, entreating and then making up again.

Something got into Nilkanta now. He could not think of a reason for
quarrelling with anyone, yet was full of bitterness and unease. He began
to be needlessly nasty to the boys who followed him around; he gave his
pet dog undeserved kicks, so that it yelped noisily; he violently slashed
at weeds with a stick as he walked along.

Kiran loved to see people eat well, to sit and serve them with their
food. Nilkanta was a good eater: it was not hard to get him to take more
and more of whatever he liked. So Kiran would often call him and serve
him herself – it gave her special pleasure to watch him enjoying his food.
But now that Satish was here, Kiran often did not have time to sit with
Nilkanta as he ate. Formerly his appetite had not been affected by her
absence: he would even rinse the milk-pan and drink the water. But now
if she didn’t call him he was sick at heart and felt a bitter taste in his
mouth: he would rise without finishing, telling the maid in a husky voice
that he wasn’t hungry. He hoped that Kiran would send for him if she
heard about this, entreat him to take some food; he resolved that he
would not give in, would go on saying he wasn’t hungry. But no one told
her, and she didn’t send for him: the maidservant finished up the food
that was left. He would then turn out the lamp in his room, throw
himself down on the dark bed, sobbing and choking and pressing his
face into the pillow. But what use was this? Who took any notice? Who
came to give him comfort? Eventually sleep – kindest of nurses – came
with her gentle touch to bring relief to this sad, motherless boy.

Nilkanta was convinced that Satish was running him down before
Kiran. On days when she was silent for no reason, he was sure she was
angry with him because of something that Satish had said. He often now
prayed to the gods fiercely, ‘May I be Satish in another life, and may
Satish be me.’ He knew that a curse delivered by a Brahmin with full
concentration never failed, and he therefore as good as burnt himself
with passion as he put the fire of Brahma on to Satish, while peals of
merry laughter – Satish’s laugh mixed with Kiran’s – came down from
the room above.

Nilkanta did not dare to come out in open enmity with Satish, but
took every opportunity to cause him minor inconveniences. If Satish left
his soap on the steps down to the Ganges while he went for a dip,
Nilkanta would swoop and run off with it, so that when Satish returned
it was no longer there. Once when swimming he suddenly saw his best
embroidered shirt floating away: he assumed it had flown in the wind,
but there didn’t seem to be any wind blowing.

One day Kiran, wanting to entertain Satish, called Nilkanta and asked
him to sing some yātrā-songs. Nilkanta made no reply. Surprised, she
asked what had happened. Again Nilkanta was silent. She asked once
more. ‘I’ve forgotten them,’ he said, and went out.

At last it was time for Kiran to return home. Everyone started to get
ready: Satish too was to go back with them. But no one said anything to
Nilkanta. No one seemed even to consider whether he would go or stay.
Kiran eventually proposed to take him; but when her mother-in-law,
husband and brother-in-law all objected with one voice, Kiran too
abandoned her resolve. Finally two days before they were due to leave,
she called the boy and gently advised him to return to his village.

To hear her speak tenderly to him again after such long neglect was
too much for Nilkanta, and he burst out crying. Kiran’s eyes, too, filled
with tears. She realized with great distress how wrong she had been
temporarily to encourage affection in a person she would have to leave.

Satish was near by at the time. Infuriated by the sight of a grown boy
weeping, he snapped, ‘Good God! At the drop of a hat, overcome with
snivelling!’ Kiran rebuked him for this heartless remark. ‘You don’t
understand, Baudi,’ said Satish. ‘You believe in everyone too much. You
knew nothing about him, yet you let him live here like a king. He’s
frightened of being small fry again – that’s why he’s making such a
scene. He knows that a couple of tears will sway you.’
Nilkanta rushed out of the room. In his mind he was stabbing an
image of Satish with a knife, piercing him with needles, setting him on
fire. Satish’s actual body remained unscathed: the only blood that flowed
was from Nilkanta’s heart.

Satish had brought from Calcutta a fancy inkstand he had purchased,
with two shell-boats on either side to hold the ink, and a German silver
swan in the middle with its wings spread and beak open to hold the
pens. Satish prized this greatly; he would even sometimes polish it
carefully with a silk handkerchief. Kiran would often jokingly tap the
swan’s beak with her finger and sing,

O swan, swan, Brahmin twice born,
Why are you so heartless?

– and joking arguments would follow between her and her brother-inlaw about it.

The morning before their departure, Satish could not find the
inkstand. Kiran laughed and said, ‘Your swan has flown away to search
for your Damayanti!’ But Satish was incensed. He was certain that
Nilkanta had stolen the thing – he could even find witnesses who had
seen him loitering near Satish’s room the previous night. The accused
was brought before Satish. Kiran was present too. Satish asked straight
out, ‘Where have you put the inkstand that you stole from me? Give it
back!’

Nilkanta had often received beatings from Sharat for various offences
and also for no offences, and had borne them all stoically. But when the
theft of the inkstand was ascribed to him in front of Kiran, his large eyes
burnt like fire, his chest heaved and choked his throat, and if Satish had
said one more word the boy would have pounced like a furious kitten
and gouged him with all ten fingernails.

Kiran called him into the next room and asked him in kind, soft tones,
‘Nilu, if you have that inkstand, give it me quietly and no one will say
anything to you.’ Heavy tears welled from his eyes: he covered his face
with his hands and wept. Kiran came out of the room and said, ‘Nilkanta
did not steal your inkstand.’

Sharat and Satish both insisted, ‘No one but him could have stolen it.’

‘It wasn’t him,’ said Kiran firmly.

Sharat wanted to fetch Nilkanta to interrogate him, but Kiran said,

‘No. I forbid you to ask him anything about the theft.’

‘We should search his room and his box,’ said Satish.

‘If you do that,’ said Kiran, ‘I shall have nothing more to do with you.
You shouldn’t cast suspicion on the innocent.’

As she spoke, tears collected in her eyelids. The appeal of those tears
in her sad eyes ensured that no further action was taken against
Nilkanta. But the unjust treatment of an innocent orphan boy sent a
surge of sympathy through Kiran’s heart. That evening she entered
Nilkanta’s room with a fine matching dhoti and chadar, two shirts, a pair
of new shoes and a ten-rupee note. Her plan was to put these loving gifts
inside his box without telling him. The tin box too had been given by
her. Taking her bunch of keys from the end of her sari, she quietly
opened the box. But she couldn’t fit her presents into it. Cotton-reels,
bamboo-twigs, polished shells for cutting green mangoes, the bottoms of
broken glasses, and various similar articles were heaped inside it. She
decided that if she carefully rearranged these things, everything would
go in. She began to empty the box. First of all the cotton-reels, 
spinningtops and knives came out; then some clean and dirty clothes, and then,
right at the bottom, Satish’s precious swan inkstand.

Amazed and flushed, Kiran sat pondering for a long time with the
inkstand in her hand. When Nilkanta came into the room from behind
her, she never even noticed. He saw everything: realized that Kiran had
herself come like a thief to confirm his thieving, and that he had been
caught. But how could he explain that he had not stolen like a common
thief out of greed, that he’d done it in retaliation, that he’d meant to
throw the thing into the river, and only in a moment of weakness had he
not thrown it away but had buried it in his box? He was not a thief, he
was not a thief! But then what was he? How could he say what he was?
He had stolen something but he was not a thief! The fact that Kiran had
suspected him – it was the cruel injustice of this that he would never be
able to explain, never be able to bear.

With a long sigh, Kiran put the inkstand back into the box. Like a thief
herself, she pressed the dirty clothes on top of it, then those boyish
things – cotton-reels, twigs, spinning-tops, shells, pieces of glass; then
she arranged her presents and the ten-rupee note.

The next day there was no sign of the Brahmin boy. The villagers said
they had not seen him; the police said he was missing. ‘We must look at
his box now,’ said Sharat.

‘Not on any account,’ said Kiran adamantly.

Later, she fetched the box into her own room, took out the inkstand
and secretly threw it into the Ganges.

Sharat and his family went home; the house and garden lay empty.
Only Nilkanta’s village dog remained. It wandered along by the river,
forgetting to eat, searching, searching and howling.

