Brindaban Kunda was furious. He announced to his father, ‘I’m leaving –
right now.’

‘You ungrateful scoundrel,’ said Yajnanath Kunda. ‘All I’ve spent
feeding and clothing you over the years, with not a paisa back – and
now see how you turn on me.’

In fact, the amount spent on food and clothing in Yajnanath’s house
had never been great. The sages of old survived on impossibly little;
Yajnanath presented an equally noble example. He could not go quite as
far as he liked, partly because of the demands of modern life, partly
because of the unreasonable rules for keeping body and soul together
which Nature imposes. His son had put up with this while he was
unmarried; but after marrying, his standards of food and dress began to
clash with his father’s extreme austerity. Brindaban’s standards were
material rather than spiritual. His requirements were in line with
society’s changing response to cold, heat, hunger and thirst. There were
frequent rows between father and son, and matters came to a head when
Brindaban’s wife fell seriously ill. The kabirāj wanted to prescribe an
expensive medicine for her, but Yajnanath questioned his competence
and dismissed him. Brindaban pleaded with his father at first, then grew
angry, but to no avail. When his wife died, he accused his father of
murdering her. ‘What do you mean?’ said Yajnanath. ‘Do you suppose
that no one who takes medicine dies? If expensive medicine were the
answer, kings and emperors would be immortal. Why should your wife
die with any more pomp than your mother or grandmother?’

Truly if Brindaban had not been blinded with grief and seen things
objectively, he would have found much consolation in this thought.
Neither his mother nor grandmother had taken medicine when they
were dying. It was an ancient custom in the household not to do so. But
modern people do not want to die according to ancient rules. (I am
speaking of the time when the British had newly arrived in this country,
but the behaviour of the younger generation was already causing
consternation among their elders.)

This was why up-to-date Brindaban quarrelled with old-fashioned
Yajnanath and said, ‘I’m leaving.’

Giving him instant permission to go, his father said for all to hear that
to give his son a single paisa would be as sinful as shedding a cow’s
blood. Brindaban, for his part, said that to take any of his father’s money
would be like shedding his mother’s blood. They then parted company.

After so many undisturbed years, the people of the village were rather
excited by this mini-revolution. And because Brindaban had been
deprived of his inheritance, they all tried – as hard as they could – to
distract Yajnanath from remorse at the rift with his son. They said that
to quarrel with one’s father over a mere wife could happen only in this
day and age. After all, if a wife goes she can quickly be replaced by
another – but if a father goes a second father cannot be found for love or
money! This was a sound argument; but in my view (Brindaban being
what he was) it would have cheered him somewhat rather than making
him penitent.

It is unlikely that Yajnanath felt much distress at his son’s departure.
It was a considerable financial saving, and furthermore it removed a
dread that had plagued him constantly – that Brindaban might one day
poison him: what little food he ate was tainted by this morbid notion. It
lessened somewhat when his daughter-in-law died; and now that his son
had left he felt much more relaxed.

Only one thing pained him. Brindaban had taken his four-year-old son
Gokulchandra with him. Gokul had cost relatively little to feed and
clothe, so Yajnanath had felt quite easy towards him. (Despite his regret
at the boy’s removal, however, he could not help making some rapid
calculations: how much he would save each month now that they had
both gone, how much each year, and how much capital would earn an
equivalent amount of interest.) It became difficult living in an empty
house, without Gokul’s mischief to disturb it. Yajnanath missed having
no one to pester him during the pūjās, no one pinching his food at 
mealtimes, no one running away with the inkpot when he did his accounts.
Washing and eating with no one to disturb him was a melancholy
business. Such undisturbed emptiness was what people gained after
death, he thought. It tugged at his heart to see, in his bedding and quilt,
holes made by his grandson, and, on the mat he sat on, ink-blots made
by the same artist. For making his dhoti unfit to wear in less than two
years, the pampered boy had been severely scolded by his grandfather.
Now Yajnanath felt tears in his eyes when he saw that dhoti in Gokul’s
bedroom, dirty, torn, abandoned, knotted all over. Instead of using it to
make wicks for lamps or for some other domestic purpose, he carefully
stored it in a trunk, and promised that if Gokul returned and ruined a
dhoti in even a single year, he would not scold him. But Gokul did not
return. Yajnanath seemed to be ageing much faster than before, and the
empty house felt emptier every day.

Yajnanath could not stay peacefully at home. Even in the afternoon,
when all high-born people take a siesta, he roamed about the village
with a hookah in his hand. During these silent afternoon walks, the
village-boys would abandon their games and, retreating to a safe
distance, bellow out locally composed rhymes about Yajnanath’s
miserliness. They none of them dared – in case their next meal was
spoiled by so bad an omen – to utter his real name: they gave him names
of their choosing. Old folk called him ‘Yajnanash’;1 why exactly the boys
should have called him ‘Bat’ is hard to explain. Perhaps they saw some
resemblance in his pale, sickly skin.

II
One day Yajnanath was wandering along mango-tree-shaded paths in
this way, when he saw a boy he had not previously seen taking
command of the others and directing them in entirely new sorts of
mischief. The boys were quite carried away by his forceful character and
fresh imagination. Instead of retreating like them at the sight of the old
man, the new boy went smartly right up to Yajnanath, and shaking out
his chadar released a chameleon, which ran over Yajnanath’s body and
off into the bushes – leaving him quivering and smarting at the shock.
The boys roared with amusement. A few paces on, Yajnanath’s gāmchā
was suddenly whipped off his shoulders, to reappear as a turban on the
new boy’s head.

Yajnanath was rather impressed by this novel kind of courtesy from a
young stranger. He had not had such daring familiarity from any boy for
a long time. By much shouting and coaxing, he managed to bring him to
heel.

‘What’s your name?’ he asked.

‘Nitai Pal.’

‘Where are you from?’

‘Shan’t tell you.’

‘Who’s your father?’

‘Shan’t tell you.’

‘Why won’t you tell me?’

‘I’ve run away from home.’

‘Why?’

‘My father wanted to send me to school.’

Yajnanath felt immediately that to send such a boy to school would be
a waste of money and that his father must be a fool.

‘Will you come and live in my house?’ he asked.

Raising no objection, the boy came along and settled in there as easily
as under the shade of a roadside tree. Not only that, he issued barefaced
orders for food and dress as if paid for in advance – and roundly
disputed such matters with the master of the house. It had been easy to
win arguments with his own son; but with someone else’s, Yajnanath
had to give in.

III
The villagers were amazed at the unprecedented affection that Yajnanath
showed for Nitai Pal. ‘The old man has not got much longer to live,’ they
thought, ‘and this strange boy will inherit all his wealth.’ They were all
very envious of him, and were determined to do him down. But the old
man hid him as closely as the ribs of his chest.

Sometimes the boy fretted and talked of leaving. Yajnanath would
appeal to his greed, saying, ‘You’ll get all my wealth when I die.’ The
boy was still young, but he knew the measure of this promise.

Then the villagers started to search for Nitai’s father. ‘How sore his
parents must be about him!’ they said. ‘What a wicked boy he is!’ They
hurled unrepeatable abuse at him – but their feelings were fired more by
selfish malice than moral outrage.

One day Yajnanath heard from a passer-by that a man called Damodar
Pal was looking for his lost son, and was on his way to the village. Nitai
was alarmed at this news – he was about to abandon his prospects and
flee; but Yajnanath reassured him, saying, ‘I’ll hide you where no one
will be able to find you. Not even the people in this village.’

‘Show me where,’ said the boy, very intrigued.

‘If I show you now, we’ll be found out,’ said Yajnanath. ‘I’ll show you
tonight.’

Nitai was excited by this promise of a new adventure. He vowed that
as soon as his father had gone, having failed to find him, he would use
the place to challenge his friends in a game of hide-and-seek. No one
would find him! It would be great fun. It amused him greatly that his
father had scoured the whole country for him and had failed to find him.

At midday Yajnanath locked the boy into the house and went out
somewhere. When he returned, Nitai pestered him with questions; and
as soon as dusk fell he asked if they could go.

‘It’s not night yet,’ said Yajnanath.

A little later Nitai said, ‘It’s night now, Dādā – let’s go.’

‘People are not asleep yet,’ said Yajnanath.

‘They’re asleep now – let’s go,’ said Nitai a few moments later.

The night wore on. Though he was doing his utmost to stay awake,
Nitai began to nod as he sat. At one in the morning, Yajnanath took
Nitai by the hand and led him along the dark paths of the sleeping
village. There was no sound anywhere, except for a dog barking from
time to time, answered loudly by other dogs near and far. Sometimes
nocturnal birds, startled by the sound of footsteps, flapped away through
the forest. Nitai nervously clasped Yajnanath’s hand.

After crossing several fields, they came at last to a tumbledown, 
godforsaken temple surrounded by jungle. ‘Here?’ said Nitai, rather crossly.
It was not at all as he had imagined. There was no mystery here. He had
sometimes had to spend nights in ruined temples like this after he had
run away from home. The place was not bad for hide-and-seek, but not
totally beyond discovery.

Yajnanath lifted up a slab in the middle of the temple. The boy saw
that beneath it there was a kind of cellar, with a lamp flickering. He was
surprised and intrigued by this, but rather frightened too. Yajnanath
climbed down a ladder into the cellar, and Nitai nervously followed him.

Down in the cellar, there were brass water-pots everywhere. There
was a mat for a deity in the midst of them, with vermilion, sandal-paste,
garlands and other pūjā-materials laid out in front. Nitai noticed with
amazement that the pots were full of rupee-coins and gold mohars.

‘Nitai,’ said Yajnanath, ‘I told you that I would give you all my money.
I haven’t got much – just these few pitcherfuls. Today I place it all in
your hands.’

Nitai jumped. ‘All? Aren’t you going to keep a single rupee for
yourself?’

‘It would bring leprosy to my hand if I took any of it. But one more
thing: if my long-lost grandson Gokulchandra, or his son or grandson or
great-grandson or any of his descendants come, then all this money must
be given to him or to them.’

Nitai decided that Yajnanath had gone mad. ‘All right,’ he agreed.

‘Now sit on this āsan,’ said Yajnanath.

‘Why?’

‘You must be worshipped.’

‘Why?’

‘It is the custom.’

The boy sat on the āsan. Yajnanath smeared sandalwood on his
forehead, and a spot of vermilion, and put a garland round his neck.
Then, sitting before him, he began to mutter mantras. Nitai was terrified
at finding himself worshipped as a god; terrified by the mantras. ‘Dādā,’
he cried.

Yajnanath continued reading the mantras, without replying. At length
he dragged the heavy pitchers, one by one, in front of the boy and
dedicated them, making him say each time: ‘I count and bequeath this
money to Gokulchandra Kunda son of Brindaban Kunda son of
Yajnanath Kunda son of Paramananda Kunda son of Prankrishna Kunda
son of Gadadhar Kunda son of Yudhisthira Kunda; or to Gokulchandra’s
son or grandson or great-grandson or any of his true descendants.’

The repetition of this formula over and over again had a stupefying
effect on the boy. His tongue gradually lost all movement. By the time
the ceremony was over, the air of the little cave-like room was thick
with smoke from the lamp and the breath of the two of them. Nitai’s
palate was dry; his arms and legs were feverishly hot; he was finding it
difficult to breathe. The lamp guttered and went out. In the darkness, the
boy sensed Yajnanath climbing up the ladder.

‘Where are you going, Dādā?’ he cried in alarm.

‘I’m leaving you,’ said Yajnanath. ‘You stay here: no one will find you.
But remember Gokulchandra son of Brindaban son of Yajnanath.’

He climbed out of the cellar and pulled the ladder up after him.
‘Dādā,’ gasped Nitai, barely able to speak, ‘I want to go back to my
father.’

Yajnanath put the slab back into place, and straining his ears just
managed to hear Nitai gasping the word, ‘Father.’ Then there was a
thud, and after that no sound at all.

Consigning his wealth in this way to the care of a yakṣa, Yajnanath
pressed some soil over the slab, and heaped it over with sand and broken
bricks from the temple. He covered the heap with clumps of grass, and
heeled in bushes from the forest. The night was almost over, but he
could not bring himself to leave the place. Every now and then he put
his ear to the ground. He imagined that he heard a crying from the
innermost depths of the Earth; that the night sky was filled with that one
sound; that all the people asleep in the world had been woken by it, and
were sitting on their beds, listening. The old man went on frenziedly
piling up more and more soil, as if trying to stop Earth’s mouth. But
somebody called out, ‘Father’ – and Yajnanath thumped the ground and
hissed, ‘Be quiet, everyone will hear you.’

Again, somebody called out, ‘Father.’

The old man noticed dawn arriving. Fearfully he left the temple and
emerged into open country. Even there someone was calling, ‘Father.’ He
turned in great alarm: there in front of him was his son Brindaban.
‘Father,’ said Brindaban, ‘I hear that my son has been hiding in your
house. Give him back to me.’

The old man lurched towards Brindaban. His eyes and face were
horribly distorted as he leant forward and said, ‘Your son?’

‘Yes,’ said Brindaban, ‘Gokul. Now his name is Nitai Pal and my name
is Damodar. You have a bad name with everyone round about, so we
changed our names – otherwise no one would have talked to us.’

The old man clawed at the sky with all his fingers, as if struggling to
clasp the air; then fell to the ground, fainting. When he came round
again, he hurried Brindaban to the temple. ‘Can you hear the crying?’ he
asked.

‘No,’ said Brindaban.

‘If you strain your ears, can’t you hear someone crying “Father”?’

‘No,’ said Brindaban.

The old man seemed relieved at this. From then on he would go round
asking everyone ‘Can you hear the crying?’ – and they all laughed at his
madman’s words.

About four years later, Yajnanath was on his death-bed. When the
world’s light grew dim in his eyes and breath began to fail, he suddenly
sat up in delirium; groping with both hands, he murmured, ‘Nitai –
someone has taken my ladder away.’ When he found no ladder out of the
vast, lightless, airless cellar he was in, he slumped back against the
pillows. Then he vanished, to the place which no one playing hide-andseek 
on earth can discover.

