Subalchandra’s son was called Sushilchandra. But people do not always
suit their names.1 Subalchandra was not strong, and Sushilchandra was
not very well-behaved. He would go around annoying all the people of
the neighbourhood. His father tried to chase after him, but he had
rheumatism in his legs and the boy could run like a deer; so the cuffs,
blows and slaps did not always fall in the right places. But whenever
Sushilchandra was caught, he did not get off lightly.

Today was Saturday and school stopped at two o’clock, but
Sushilchandra did not want to go to school at all. There were many
reasons for this. One was that today there was to be a geography test;
another was that tonight there was to be a firework display at the Boses’
house near by. The preparations had started in the morning. Sushil
wanted to spend the day there.

After a lot of thought, he lay down on his bed when it was time to go
to school. His father Subal asked him, ‘What’s this? Lying on your bed?
Aren’t you going to school?’

‘I’ve got a stomachache,’ said Sushil, ‘I can’t go to school today.’

‘Just you wait!’ said Subal to himself, seeing right through him, and
went on: ‘Then you’d better not go out anywhere. I’ll send Hari to watch
the Boses’ fireworks. I had bought some toffee for you today; you’d
better not eat that either. You stay here quietly, and I’ll make some
herbal medicine for you.’

Bolting the door, he went and prepared an extremely bitter herbal
medicine. Sushil was in a fix: he hated medicine quite as much as he
loved toffee. He had been looking forward ever since yesterday night to
going to the Boses’ house, and now it was ruled out.

When Subal Babu returned to the room with a large bowl of medicine,
Sushil jumped up from his bed saying, ‘My stomachache is completely
gone – I’ll go to school.’

‘Out of the question,’ said Subal. ‘Drink the medicine and rest quietly.’
He forced him to drink the medicine and went out again, locking the
door with a padlock.

As he lay on the bed weeping, Sushil kept thinking, ‘If only I could be
as old as Father! I could do as I liked and no one would be able to stop
me!’

His father Subal was sitting alone outside the room and thinking, ‘My
parents spoilt me so – I never did any proper study. If only I could have
my childhood back, I wouldn’t waste any time – I’d do nothing but
school work.’

The Goddess of Desires1 was passing by at that time. Seeing what
father and son desired, she decided, ‘Right – let their wishes be granted
for a while.’ So she said to the father, ‘Your wish is fulfilled. From
tomorrow you will be as young as your son.’ To the boy she said, ‘From
tomorrow you will be as old as your father.’ They were both delighted.

The elderly Subalchandra did not sleep well at night – he used to fall
asleep towards dawn. But today what happened? He woke up bright and
early, and positively sprang out of bed. He found he was very small; all
his lost teeth had been restored; his beard and moustache had vanished.
The dhoti and shirt he had gone to sleep in were so loose and baggy that
the sleeves practically reached the floor, the neck reached down to his
chest, and the bottom of the dhoti drooped so low that he tripped on it.

Sushilchandra normally got up early and ran around making mischief,
but today he didn’t wake up. When he was roused by Subalchandra’s
shouting, he found his clothes were so tight that they were in danger of
bursting at the seams. His body had expanded all round; half his face
was hidden by a pepper-and-salt beard; and when he felt his head, which
formerly had a full shock of hair, he found a gleaming bald patch. He
did not want to get out of bed. He yawned noisily, rolled over to this
side and that; and at last – greatly annoyed by his father’s shouts – he
staggered to his feet.

Both had had their wishes fulfilled; but with very awkward
consequences. Earlier I said that Sushilchandra had thought that if he
could be big and free like his father Subalchandra, he would climb trees
as he pleased, jump into water, eat green mangoes, grab bird-chicks, and
wander all over the fields. He would come home and eat when he liked,
and no one would be able to stop him. But the extraordinary thing was
that when he woke up this morning he had no wish to climb trees. When
he saw the pond he felt he would catch his death of cold if he jumped
into it. Instead, he spread out a mat on the verandah, and quietly sat
down to think.

He decided that it would not be good to give up games completely; he
ought to have a go. So he tried several times to climb an āmṛā tree. The
day before he would have climbed it as nimbly as a squirrel; but now
with his old body he couldn’t climb it at all. A slender branch low down
broke under his weight and he thudded to the ground. Passers-by burst
out laughing at the sight of an old man climbing a tree like a boy and
falling. Hanging his head in shame, Sushilchandra returned to the mat
on the verandah.

Calling the servant he said, ‘Hey, go and buy me a rupee’s worth of
toffee!’ He had a passion for toffee. There were various kinds displayed
in a shop near the school; he bought them with the few odd paisa he got
as pocket-money – and was determined that when he had money like his
father he would stuff his pockets full of sweets and eat them all the time!
Today the servant brought him a whole bagful: he took one, put it into
his toothless mouth, and started to suck – but a child’s sweets are not
right at all for an old man. ‘My father is now a little boy, so he can have
them,’ he thought to himself; but then he thought, ‘No, I can’t do that –
it will make him ill to eat so many.’

Until yesterday all the local boys had played kapāṭi with
Sushilchandra, but today when they came to look for him and found the
elderly Sushilchandra, they ran off. He had thought, ‘If I were free like
my father I would spend all day playing kapāṭi with my chums – ḍu-ḍuḍu-ḍu 
all day long!’ But today he didn’t want to see Rakhal, Gopal,
Akshay, Nibaran, Harish and Nanda – he wanted to sit quietly. Boys
were too noisy.

I said earlier that his father Subalchandra used to sit on a mat on the
verandah and think, ‘When I was young I used to waste my time
mucking about; if I could be young again I’d be a good boy – I’d sit
indoors with the door closed and learn my lessons. I’d even stop
listening to Grandmother’s stories in the evening: instead I’d study till
ten or eleven at night.’

But now that he was a boy again, Subalchandra didn’t want to go to
school at all. When Sushil irritably asked, ‘Father, aren’t you going to
school?’ Subal scratched his head, looked at his feet and murmured, ‘I’ve
got a stomachache today. I can’t go to school.’

‘Can’t you indeed?’ said Sushil angrily. ‘I’ve also had stomachaches
like that at going to school. I know all about them.’

Indeed Sushil had shirked school on so many pretexts and so recently
that there was no way his father could deceive him. He packed his little
father off to school. As soon as he got back, he wanted to dash straight
out and play, but the elderly bespectacled Sushilchandra was at that
very time intoning to himself from a copy of Krittibas’s Rāmāyaṇa, and
Subal’s noise and running about disturbed his reading. So he sat Subal
down in front of him, put a slate into his hand and made him do sums.
He devised such huge sums that it took his father an hour to complete
just one of them. In the evening a crowd of old men gathered in Sushil’s
room to play chess. To keep Subal quiet at that time, Sushil engaged a
tutor who taught him till ten at night.

Sushil was very strict about food, because when his father had been
old his digestion had not been good – if he ate too much he suffered
from acidity. Sushil remembered this well, so he was careful not to let
him over-eat. But now that he was suddenly young again his father had
such an appetite that he could have eaten a horse! Sushil gave him so
little that he raged with hunger. He grew very thin – his bones stuck out
all over. Thinking he was seriously ill, Sushil stuffed him with medicine.

But the elderly Sushil also had many difficulties. He could not bear
what formerly he had liked. Before, if he heard of a yātrā anywhere, he
would run out of the house, however cold or rainy, to watch it. When
the elderly Sushil tried that, he got a cold and cough, pains in his head
and limbs, and had to stay three weeks in bed. He had long been used to
bathing in the village pond, but no sooner had he tried that now than
the joints in his arms and legs swelled and he got terrible rheumatism:
he had to be treated by a doctor for six months. After that he bathed in
warm water only, at two-day intervals, and refused to let Subal bathe in
the pond. Once he forgot his age and jumped out of bed with a single
bound, jarring his bones terribly. When he stuffed a whole pān into his
mouth, he found he had no teeth, and couldn’t chew it. If he 
absentmindedly combed or brushed his whole head, the scratching reminded
him that most of it was bald. Sometimes he forgot he was as old as his
father had been and lapsed into tricks such as chucking pebbles into old
women’s water-pots. When people drove him off, scandalized that an old
man could behave like a child, he wanted to hide his face with shame.

Subalchandra also sometimes forgot that he was now a little boy.
Imagining that he was as old as previously, he would go and join the old
folks at their card-playing, sit down and chat to them as equals; at which
everyone said, ‘Run off and play, run along now! Who do you think you
are?’ And seizing him by the ears, they threw him out. Or he’d go to the
schoolmaster and say, ‘Have you got some tobacco to spare?’ I feel like a
smoke.’ The schoolmaster made him stand on one leg on a bench for
this. Or he’d go to the barber and say, ‘Why haven’t you come to shave
me for so long, you scoundrel?’ ‘Cheeky devil,’ thought the barber, and
answered, ‘I’ll come in ten years’ time.’ Sometimes he tried to beat his
son Sushil as he had often done before. Sushil was incensed at this and
said, ‘Is that what school has taught you? To have a go at an old man,
you little rascal!’ People came running from all around to slap and beat
and hurl abuse at him.

Then Subal started to pray fervently, ‘If only I could be big and free
like my son Sushil, I’d be out of this!’ And Sushil said with clasped
hands, ‘O God, make me small like my father, so that I can play around
as I like. My father has become so naughty that I cannot control him; it’s
getting me down.’

The Goddess of Desires came back and said, ‘Well, have you got what
you wanted?’

They both knelt and did praṇām to her and said, ‘We assure you,
Goddess, we have. Now make us what we were before.’

‘All right,’ said the Goddess of Desires, ‘when you wake up tomorrow
you’ll be back to what you were.’

The next morning when Subal woke up he was as old as formerly; and
Sushil when he woke up was a boy again. They both assumed they had
woken from a dream. Subalchandra shouted out gruffly, ‘Sushil, are you
learning your grammar?’

‘I think I’ve lost my book, Father,’ said Sushilchandra, scratching his
head.

